 
 
 
The General Theory of Employment, 
Interest, and Money 
by 
John Maynard Keynes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money 
John Maynard Keynes 
Table of Contents 
•  PREFACE  
•  PREFACE TO THE GERMAN EDITION  
•  PREFACE TO THE JAPANESE EDITION  
•  PREFACE TO THE FRENCH EDITION  
Book I: Introduction 
1.  THE GENERAL THEORY  
2.  THE POSTULATES OF THE CLASSICAL ECONOMICS  
3.  THE PRINCIPLE OF EFFECTIVE DEMAND  
Book II: Definitions and Ideas 
4.  THE CHOICE OF UNITS  
5.  EXPECTATION AS DETERMINING OUTPUT AND EMPLOYMENT  
6.  THE DEFINITION OF INCOME, SAVING AND INVESTMENT  
o  APPENDIX ON USER COST 
7.  THE MEANING OF SAVING AND INVESTMENT FURTHER CONSIDERED  
Book III: The Propensity to Consume 
8.  THE PROPENSITY TO CONSUME: 
I. THE OBJECTIVE FACTORS  
9.  THE PROPENSITY TO CONSUME: 
II. THE SUBJECTIVE FACTORS  
10. THE MARGINAL PROPENSITY TO CONSUME AND THE MULTIPLIER  
Book IV: The Inducement to Invest 
11. THE MARGINAL EFFICIENCY OF CAPITAL  
12. THE STATE OF LONG-TERM EXPECTATION  
13. THE GENERAL THEORY OF THE RATE OF INTEREST  
14. THE CLASSICAL THEORY OF THE RATE OF INTEREST  
o  APPENDIX ON THE RATE OF INTEREST IN MARSHALL'S 
PRINCIPLES OF ECONOMICS, RICARDO'S PRINCIPLES OF 
POLITICAL ECONOMY, AND ELSEWHERE  
15. THE PSYCHOLOGICAL AND BUSINESS INCENTIVES TO LIQUIDITY  
16. SUNDRY OBSERVATIONS ON THE NATURE OF CAPITAL  
17. THE ESSENTIAL PROPERTIES OF INTEREST AND MONEY  
18. THE GENERAL THEORY OF EMPLOYMENT RE-STATED  

Book V: Money-wages and Prices 
19. CHANGES IN MONEY-WAGES  
o  PROFESSOR PIGOU'S 'THEORY OF UNEMPLOYMENT'  
20. THE EMPLOYMENT FUNCTION  
21. THE THEORY OF PRICES  
Short Notes Suggested by the General Theory 
22. NOTES ON THE TRADE CYCLE  
23. NOTES ON MERCANTILISM, THE USURY LAWS, STAMPED MONEY 
AND THEORIES OF UNDER-CONSUMPTION  
24. CONCLUDING NOTES ON THE SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY TOWARDS 
WHICH THE GENERAL THEORY MIGHT LEAD  
•  Appendix 1  
•  Appendix 2  
•  Appendix 3  
 
Rendered into HTML on Wednesday April 16 09:46:33 CST 2003, by Steve Thomas for 
The University of Adelaide Library Electronic Texts Collection.  
For offline reading, the complete set of pages is available for download from 
http://etext.library.adelaide.edu.au/k/k44g/k44g.zip
This work is also available as a single file, as 
http://etext.library.adelaide.edu.au/k/k44g/k44g.html
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
PREFACE 
This book is chiefly addressed to my fellow economists. I hope that it will be intelligible 
to others. But its main purpose is to deal with difficult questions of theory, and only in 
the  second  place  with  the  applications  of  this  theory  to  practice.  For  if  orthodox 
economics is at fault, the error is to be found not in the superstructure, which has been 
erected with great care for logical consistency, but in a lack of clearness and of generality 
in  the  pre  misses.  Thus  I  cannot  achieve  my  object  of  persuading  economists  to  re-
examine critically certain of their basic assumptions except by a highly abstract argument 
and also by much controversy. I wish there could have been less of the latter. But I have 
thought it important, not only to explain my own point of view, but also to show in what 
respects it departs from the prevailing theory. Those, who are strongly wedded to what I 
shall  call  'the  classical  theory',  will  fluctuate,  I  expect,  between  a  belief  that  I  am  quite 
wrong and a belief that I am saying nothing new. It is for others to determine if either of 
these  or  the  third  alternative  is  right.  My controversial  passages  are  aimed  at  providing 
some  material  for  an  answer;  and  I  must  ask  forgiveness  if,  in  the  pursuit  of  sharp 
distinctions,  my  controversy  is  itself  too  keen.  I  myself  held  with  conviction  for  many 
years the theories which I now attack, and I am not, I think, ignorant of their strong points. 
The  matters  at  issue  are  of  an  importance  which  cannot  be  exaggerated.  But,  if  my 
explanations are right, it is my fellow economists, not the general public, whom I must 
first  convince.  At  this  stage  of  the  argument  the  general  public,  though  welcome  at  the 
debate,  are  only  eavesdroppers  at  an  attempt  by  an  economist  to  bring  to  an  issue  the 
deep  divergences  of  opinion  between  fellow  economists  which  have  for  the  time  being 
almost  destroyed  the  practical  influence  of  economic  theory,  and  will,  until  they  are 
resolved, continue to do so. 
The relation between this book and my Treatise on Money [JMK vols. v and vi], which I 
published five years ago, is probably clearer to myself than it will be to others; and what 
in my own mind is a natural evolution in a line of thought which I have been pursuing for 
several  years,  may  sometimes  strike  the  reader  as  a  confusing  change  of  view.  This 
difficulty is not made less by certain changes in terminology which I have felt compelled 
to  make.  These  changes  of  language  I  have  pointed  out  in  the  course  of  the  following 
pages;  but  the  general  relationship  between  the  two  books  can  be  expressed  briefly  as 
follows.  When  I  began  to  write  my  Treatise  on  Money  I  was  still  moving  along  the 
traditional  lines  of  regarding  the  influence  of  money  as  something  so  to  speak  separate 
from  the  general  theory  of  supply  and  demand.  When  I  finished  it,  I  had  made  some 
progress  towards  pushing  monetary  theory  back  to  becoming  a  theory  of  output  as  a 
whole. But my lack of emancipation from preconceived ideas showed itself in what now 
seems  to  me  to  be  the  outstanding  fault  of  the  theoretical  parts  of  that  work  (namely, 
Books III and IV), that I failed to deal thoroughly with the effects of changes in the level 
of  output.  My  so-called  'fundamental  equations  were  an  instantaneous  picture  taken  on 
the  assumption  of  a  given  output.  They  attempted  to  show  how,  assuming  the  given 
output, forces could develop which involved a profit-disequilibrium, and thus required a 

change  in  the  level  of  output.  But  the  dynamic  development,  as  distinct  from  the 
instantaneous  picture,  was  left  incomplete  and  extremely  confused.  This  book,  on  the 
other  hand,  has  evolved  into  what  is  primarily  a  study  of  the  forces  which  determine 
changes  in  the  scale  of  output  and  employment  as  a  whole;  and,  whilst  it  is  found  that 
money  enters  into  the  economic  scheme  in  an  essential  and  peculiar  manner,  technical 
monetary  detail  falls  into  the  background.  A  monetary  economy,  we  shall  find,  is 
essentially one in which changing views about the future are capable of influencing the 
quantity  of  employment  and  not  merely  its  direction.  But  our  method  of  analysing  the 
economic behaviour of the present under the influence of changing ideas about the future 
is one which depends on the interaction of supply and demand, and is in this way linked 
up with our fundamental theory of value. We are thus led to a more general theory, which 
includes the classical theory with which we are familiar, as a special case. 
The writer of a book such as this, treading along unfamiliar paths, is extremely dependent 
on  criticism  and  conversation  if  he  is  to  avoid  an  undue  proportion  of  mistakes.  It  is 
astonishing what foolish things one can temporarily believe if one thinks too long alone, 
particularly  in  economics  (along  with  the  other  moral  sciences),  where  it  is  often 
impossible to bring one's ideas to a conclusive test either formal or experimental. In this 
book, even more perhaps than in writing my Treatise on Money, I have depended on the 
constant advice and constructive criticism of Mr R.F. Kahn. There is a great deal in this 
book which would not have taken the shape it has except at his suggestion. I have also 
had  much  help  from  Mrs  Joan  Robinson,  Mr  R.G.  Hawtrey  and  Mr  R.F.  Harrod,  who 
have  read  the  whole  of  the  proof-sheets.  The  index  has  been  compiled  by  Mr  D.  M. 
Bensusan-Butt of King's College, Cambridge. 
The composition of this book has been for the author a long struggle of escape, and so 
must  the  reading  of  it  be  for  most  readers  if  the  author's  assault  upon  them  is  to  be 
successful,—a  struggle  of  escape  from  habitual  modes  of  thought  and  expression.  The 
ideas  which  are  here  expressed  so  laboriously  are  extremely  simple  and  should  be 
obvious.  The  difficulty  lies,  not  in  the  new  ideas,  but  in  escaping  from  the  old  ones, 
which  ramify,  for  those  brought  up  as  most  of  us  have  been,  into  every  corner  of  our 
minds. 
J. M. KEYNES 
13 December 1935 
  
 
 
 
 

 
PREFACE TO THE GERMAN EDITION 
Alfred Marshall, on whose Principles of Economics all contemporary English economists 
have been brought up, was at particular pains to emphasise the continuity of his thought 
with  Ricardo's.  His  work  largely  consisted  in  grafting  the  marginal  principle  and  the 
principle  of  substitution  on  to  the  Ricardian  tradition;  and  his  theory  of  output  and 
consumption as a whole, as distinct from his theory of the production and distribution of 
a given output, was never separately expounded. Whether he himself felt the need of such 
a  theory,  I  am  not  sure.  But  his  immediate  successors  and  followers  have  certainly 
dispensed with it and have not, apparently, felt the lack of it. It was in this atmosphere 
that I was brought up. I taught these doctrines myself and it is only within the last decade 
that  I  have  been  conscious  of  their  insufficiency.  In  my  own  thought  and  development, 
therefore, this book represents a reaction, a transition away from the English classical (or 
orthodox) tradition. My emphasis upon this in the following pages and upon the points of 
my divergence from received doctrine has been regarded in some quarters in England as 
unduly  controversial.  But  how  can  one  brought  up  a  Catholic  in  English  economics, 
indeed a priest of that faith, avoid some controversial emphasis, when he first becomes a 
Protestant? 
But I fancy that all this may impress German readers somewhat differently. The orthodox 
tradition,  which  ruled  in  nineteenth  century  England,  never  took  so  firm  a  hold  of 
German thought. There have always existed important schools of economists in Germany 
who  have  strongly  disputed  the  adequacy  of  the  classical  theory  for  the  analysis  of 
contemporary events. The Manchester School and Marxism both derive ultimately from 
Ricardo,—a conclusion which is only superficially surprising. But in Germany there has 
always existed a large section of opinion which has adhered neither to the one nor to the 
other. 
It  can  scarcely  be  claimed,  however,  that  this  school  of  thought  has  erected  a  rival 
theoretical  construction;  or  has  even  attempted  to  do  so.  It  has  been  sceptical,  realistic, 
content with historical and empirical methods and results, which discard formal analysis. 
The most important unorthodox discussion on theoretical lines was that of Wicksell. His 
books were available in German (as they were not, until lately, in English); indeed one of 
the  most  important  of  them  was  written  in  German.  But  his  followers  were  chiefly 
Swedes and Austrians, the latter of whom combined his ideas with specifically Austrian 
theory  so  as  to  bring  them  in  effect,  back  again  towards  the  classical  tradition.  Thus 
Germany, quite contrary to her habit in most of the sciences, has been content for a whole 
century  to  do  without  any  formal  theory  of  economics  which  was  predominant  and 
generally accepted. 
Perhaps, therefore, I may expect less resistance from German, than from English, readers 
in  offering  a  theory  of  employment  and  output  as  a  whole,  which  departs  in  important 
respects  from  the  orthodox  tradition.  But  can  I  hope  to  overcome  Germany's  economic 
agnosticism?  Can  I  persuade  German  economists  that  methods  of  formal  analysis  have 

something important to contribute to the interpretation of contemporary events and to the 
moulding of contemporary policy? After all, it is German to like a theory. How hungry 
and thirsty German economists must feel after having lived all these years without one! 
Certainly, it is worth while for me to make the attempt. And if I can contribute some stray 
morsels  towards  the  preparation  by  German  economists  of  a  full  repast  of  theory 
designed  to  meet  specifically  German  conditions,  I  shall  be  content.  For  I  confess  that 
much  of  the  following  book  is  illustrated  and  expounded  mainly  with  reference  to  the 
conditions existing in the Anglo-Saxon countries. 
Nevertheless the theory of output as a whole, which is what the following book purports 
to provide, is much more easily adapted to the conditions of a totalitarian state, than is the 
theory of the production and distribution of a given output produced under conditions of 
free  competition  and  a  large  measure  of  laissez-faire.  The  theory  of  the  psychological 
laws  relating  consumption  and  saving,  the  influence  of  loan  expenditure  on  prices  and 
real wages, the part played by the rate of interest—these remain as necessary ingredients 
in our scheme of thought. 
I  take  this  opportunity  to  acknowledge  my  indebtedness  to  the  excellent  work  of  my 
translator Herr Waeger (I hope his vocabulary at the end of this volume may prove useful 
beyond  its  immediate  purpose)  and  to  my  publishers,  Messrs  Duncker  and  Humblot, 
whose  enterprise,  from  the  days  now  sixteen  years  ago  when  they  published  my 
Economic Consequences of the Peace, has enabled me to maintain contact with German 
readers. 
J. M. KEYNES 
7 September 1936 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
PREFACE TO THE JAPANESE EDITION 
Alfred Marshall, on whose Principles of Economics all contemporary English economists 
have been brought up, was at particular pains to emphasise the continuity of his thought 
with  Ricardo's.  His  work  largely  consisted  in  grafting  the  marginal  principle  and  the 
principle  of  substitution  on  to  the  Ricardian  tradition;  and  his  theory  of  output  and 
consumption as a whole, as distinct from his theory of the production and distribution of 
a given output, was never separately expounded. Whether he himself felt the need of such 
a  theory,  I  am  not  sure.  But  his  immediate  successors  and  followers  have  certainly 
dispensed with it and have not, apparently, felt the lack of it. It was in this atmosphere 
that I was brought up. I taught these doctrines myself and it is only within the last decade 
that  I  have  been  conscious  of  their  insufficiency.  In  my  own  thought  and  development, 
therefore, this book represents a reaction, a transition away from the English classical (or 
orthodox) tradition. My emphasis upon this in the following pages and upon the points of 
my divergence from received doctrine has been regarded in some quarters in England as 
unduly  controversial.  But  how  can  one  brought  up  in  English  economic  orthodoxy, 
indeed a priest of that faith at one time, avoid some controversial emphasis, when he first 
becomes a Protestant? 
Perhaps Japanese readers, however, will neither require nor resist my assaults against the 
English  tradition.  We  are  well  aware  of  the  large  scale  on  which  English  economic 
writings are read in Japan, but we are not so well informed as to how Japanese opinions 
regard them. The recent praiseworthy enterprise on the part of the International Economic 
Circle  of  Tokyo  in  reprinting  Malthus's  'Principles  of  Political  Economy'  as  the  first 
volume in the Tokyo Series of Reprints encourages me to think that a book which traces 
its  descent  from  Malthus  rather  than  Ricardo  may  be  received  with  sympathy  in  some 
quarters at least. 
At  any  rate  I  am  grateful  to  the  Oriental  Economist  for  making  it  possible  for  me  to 
approach Japanese readers without the extra handicap of a foreign language. 
J. M. KEYNES 
4 December 1936 
  
 
 
 
 

 
PREFACE TO THE FRENCH EDITION 
For  a  hundred  years  or  longer,  English  Political  Economy  has  been  dominated  by  an 
orthodoxy. That is not to say that an unchanging doctrine has prevailed. On the contrary. 
There  has  been  a  progressive  evolution  of  the  doctrine.  But  its  presuppositions,  its 
atmosphere, its method have remained surprisingly the same, and a remarkable continuity 
has  been  observable  through  all  the  changes.  In  that  orthodoxy,  in  that  continuous 
transition,  I  was  brought  up.  I  learnt  it,  I  taught  it,  I  wrote  it.  To  those  looking  from 
outside  I  probably  still  belong  to  it.  Subsequent  historians  of  doctrine  will  regard  this 
book as in essentially the same tradition. But I myself in writing it, and in other recent 
work which has led up to it, have felt myself to be breaking away from this orthodoxy, to 
be  in  strong  reaction  against  it,  to  be  escaping  from  something,  to  be  gaining  an 
emancipation. And this state of mind on my part is the explanation of certain faults in the 
book, in particular its controversial note in some passages, and its air of being addressed 
too much to the holders of a particular point of view and too little ad urbem et orbem. I 
was wanting to convince my own environment and did not address myself with sufficient 
directness  to  outside  opinion.  Now  three  years  later,  having  grown  accustomed  to  my 
new skin and having almost forgotten the smell of my old one, I should, if I were writing 
afresh,  endeavour  to  free  myself  from  this  fault  and  state  my  own  position  in  a  more 
clear-cut manner. 
I  say  all  this,  partly  to  explain  and  partly  to  excuse,  myself  to  French  readers.  For  in 
France there has been no orthodox tradition with the same authority over contemporary 
opinion as in my own country. In the United States the position has been much the same 
as in England. But in France, as in the rest of Europe, there has been no such dominant 
school  since  the  expiry  of  the  school  of  French  Liberal  economists  who  were  in  their 
prime twenty years ago (though they lived to so great an age, long after their influence 
had  passed  away,  that  it  fell  to  my  duty,  when  I  first  became  a  youthful  editor  of  the 
Economic Journal to write the obituaries of many of them—Levasseur, Molinari, Leroy-
Beaulieu).  If  Charles  Gide  had  attained  to  the  same  influence  and  authority  as  Alfred 
Marshall,  your  position  would  have  borne  more  resemblance  to  ours.  As  it  is,  your 
economists are eclectic, too much (we sometimes think) without deep roots in systematic 
thought. Perhaps this may make them more easily accessible to what I have to say. But it 
may also have the result that my readers will sometimes wonder what I am talking about 
when I speak, with what some of my English critics consider a misuse of language, of the 
'classical' school of thought and 'classical' economists. It may, therefore, be helpful to my 
French readers if I attempt to indicate very briefly what I regard as the main differentiae 
of my approach. 
I have called my theory a general theory. I mean by this that I am chiefly concerned with 
the  behaviour  of  the  economic  system  as  a  whole,—with  aggregate  incomes,  aggregate 
profits, aggregate output, aggregate employment, aggregate investment, aggregate saving 
rather  than  with  the  incomes,  profits,  output,  employment,  investment  and  saving  of 
particular industries, firms or individuals. And I argue that important mistakes have been 

made through extending to the system as a whole conclusion which have been correctly 
arrived at in respect of a part of it taken in isolation. 
Let me give examples of what I mean. My contention that for the system as a whole the 
amount of income which is saved, in the sense that it is not spent on current consumption, 
is and must necessarily be exactly equal to the amount of net new investment has been 
considered  a  paradox  and  has  been  the  occasion  of  widespread  controversy.  The 
explanation of this is undoubtedly to be found in the fact that this relationship of equality 
between saving and investment, which necessarily holds good for the system as a whole, 
does not hold good at all for a particular individual. There is no reason whatever why the 
new  investment  for  which  I  am  responsible  should  bear  any  relation  whatever  to  the 
amount  of  my  own  savings.  Quite  legitimately  we  regard  an  individual's  income  as 
independent  of  what  he  himself  consumes  and  invests.  But  this,  I  have  to  point  out, 
should  not  have  led  us  to  overlook  the  fact  that  the  demand  arising  out  of  the 
consumption  and  investment  of  one  individual  is  the  source  of  the  incomes  of  other 
individuals,  so  that  incomes  in  general  are  not  independent,  quite  the  contrary,  of  the 
disposition  of  individuals  to  spend  and  invest;  and  since  in  turn  the  readiness  of 
individuals to spend and invest depends on their incomes, a relationship is set up between 
aggregate savings and aggregate investment which can be very easily shown, beyond any 
possibility  of  reasonable  dispute,  to  be  one  of  exact  and  necessary  equality.  Rightly 
regarded this is a banal conclusion. But it sets in motion a train of thought from which 
more substantial matters follow. It is shown that, generally speaking, the actual level of 
output  and  employment  depends,  not  on  the  capacity  to  produce  or  on  the  pre-existing 
level of incomes, but on the current decisions to produce which depend in turn on current 
decisions to invest and on present expectations of current and prospective consumption. 
Moreover, as soon as we know the propensity to consume and to save (as I call it), that is 
to  say  the  result  for  the  community  as  a  whole  of  the  individual  psychological 
inclinations  as  to  how  to  dispose  of  given  incomes,  we  can  calculate  what  level  of 
incomes,  and  therefore  what  level  of  output  and  employment,  is  in  profit-equilibrium 
with  a  given  level  of  new  investment;  out  of  which  develops  the  doctrine  of  the 
Multiplier. Or again, it becomes evident that an increased propensity to save will ceteris 
paribus  contract  incomes  and  output;  whilst  an  increased  inducement  to  invest  will 
expand  them.  We  are  thus  able  to  analyse  the  factors  which  determine  the  income  and 
output  of  the  system  as  a  whole;—we  have,  in  the  most  exact  sense,  a  theory  of 
employment. Conclusions emerge from this reasoning which are particularly relevant to 
the problems of public finance and public policy generally and of the trade cycle. 
Another feature, especially characteristic of this book, is the theory of the rate of interest. 
In  recent  times  it  has  been  held  by  many  economists  that  the  rate  of  current  saving 
determined  the  supply  of  free  capital,  that  the  rate  of  current  investment  governed  the 
demand for it, and that the rate of interest was, so to speak, the equilibrating price-factor 
determined  by  the  point  of  intersection  of  the  supply  curve  of  savings  and  the  demand 
curve  of  investment.  But  if  aggregate  saving  is  necessarily  and  in  all  circumstances 
exactly  equal  to  aggregate  investment,  it  is  evident  that  this  explanation  collapses.  We 
have to search elsewhere for the solution. I find it in the idea that it is the function of the 
rate of interest to preserve equilibrium, not between the demand and the supply of new 

capital goods, but between the demand and the supply of money, that is to say between 
the demand for liquidity and the means of satisfying this demand. I am here returning to 
the doctrine of the older, pre-nineteenth century economists. Montesquieu, for example, 
saw  this  truth  with  considerable  clarity,—Montesquieu  who  was  the  real  French 
equivalent of Adam Smith, the greatest of your economists, head and shoulders above the 
physiocrats  in  penetration,  clear-headedness  and  good  sense  (which  are  the  qualities  an 
economist should have). But I must leave it to the text of this book to show how in detail 
all this works out. 
I have called this book the General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money; and the 
third  feature  to  which  I  may  call  attention  is  the  treatment  of  money  and  prices.  The 
following analysis registers my final escape from the confusions of the Quantity Theory, 
which  once  entangled  me.  I  regard  the  price  level  as  a  whole  as  being  determined  in 
precisely the same way as individual prices; that is to say, under the influence of supply 
and demand. Technical conditions, the level of  wages,  the  extent  of  unused  capacity  of 
plant  and  labour,  and  the  state  of  markets  and  competition  determine  the  supply 
conditions  of  individual  products  and  of  products  as  a  whole.  The  decisions  of 
entrepreneurs,  which  provide  the  incomes  of  individual  producers  and  the  decisions  of 
those individuals as to the disposition of such incomes determine the demand conditions. 
And prices—both individual prices and the price-level—emerge as the resultant of these 
two factors. Money, and the quantity of money, are not direct influences at this stage of 
the  proceedings.  They  have  done  their  work  at  an  earlier  stage  of  the  analysis.  The 
quantity  of  money  determines  the  supply  of  liquid  resources,  and  hence  the  rate  of 
interest,  and  in  conjunction  with  other  factors  (particularly  that  of  confidence)  the 
inducement  to  invest,  which  in  turn  fixes  the  equilibrium  level  of  incomes,  output  and 
employment  and  (at  each  stage  in  conjunction  with  other  factors)  the  price-level  as  a 
whole through the influences of supply and demand thus established. 
I believe that economics everywhere up to recent times has been dominated, much more 
than  has  been  understood,  by  the  doctrines  associated  with  the  name  of  J.-B.  Say.  It  is 
true that his 'law of markets' has been long abandoned by most economists; but they have 
not  extricated  themselves  from  his  basic  assumptions  and  particularly  from  his  fallacy 
that demand is created by supply. Say was implicitly assuming that the economic system 
was  always  operating  up  to  its  full  capacity,  so  that  a  new  activity  was  always  in 
substitution  for,  and  never  in  addition  to,  some  other  activity.  Nearly  all  subsequent 
economic theory has depended on, in the sense that it has required, this same assumption. 
Yet a theory so based is clearly incompetent to tackle the problems of unemployment and 
of the trade cycle. Perhaps I can best express to French readers what I claim for this book 
by saying that in the theory of production it is a final break-away from the doctrines of J.-
B. Say and that in the theory of interest it is a return to the doctrines of Montesquieu. 
J. M. KEYNES 
20 February 1939 
King's College, Cambridge 

  
Chapter 1 
THE GENERAL THEORY 
I have called this book the General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, placing 
the emphasis on the prefix general. The object of such a title is to contrast the character 
of my arguments and conclusions with those of the classical[1] theory of the subject, upon 
which I was brought up and which dominates the economic thought, both practical and 
theoretical,  of  the  governing  and  academic  classes  of  this  generation,  as  it  has  for  a 
hundred years past. I shall argue that the postulates of the classical theory are applicable 
to a special case only and not to the general case, the situation which it assumes being a 
limiting  point  of  the  possible  positions  of  equilibrium.  Moreover,  the  characteristics  of 
the special case assumed by the classical theory happen not to be those of the economic 
society  in  which  we  actually  live,  with  the  result  that  its  teaching  is  misleading  and 
disastrous if we attempt to apply it to the facts of experience. 
1. “The classical economists” was a name invented by Marx to cover Ricardo and James Mill and 
their predecessors, that is to say for the founders of the theory which culminated in the Ricardian 
economics. I have become accustomed, perhaps perpetrating a solecism, to include in “the classical 
school” the followers of Ricardo, those, that is to say, who adopted and perfected the theory of the 
Ricardian economics, including (for example) J. S. Mill, Marshall, Edgeworth and Prof. Pigou. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
Chapter 2 
THE POSTULATES OF THE CLASSICAL ECONOMICS 
Most  treatises  on  the  theory  of  value  and  production  are  primarily  concerned  with  the 
distribution of a given volume of employed resources between different uses and with the 
conditions which, assuming the employment of this quantity of resources, determine their 
relative rewards and the relative values of their products[1]. 
The question, also, of the volume of the available resources, in the sense of the size of the 
employable  population,  the  extent  of  natural  wealth  and  the  accumulated  capital 
equipment, has often been treated descriptively. But the pure theory of what determines 
the  actual  employment  of  the  available  resources  has  seldom  been  examined  in  great 
detail. To say that it has not been examined at all would, of course, be absurd. For every 
discussion concerning fluctuations of employment, of which there have been many, has 
been  concerned  with  it.  I  mean,  not  that  the  topic  has  been  overlooked,  but  that  the 
fundamental  theory  underlying  it  has  been  deemed  so  simple  and  obvious  that  it  has 
received, at the most, a bare mention[2]. 
The classical theory of employment—supposedly simple and obvious—has been based, I 
think, on two fundamental postulates, though practically without discussion, namely: 
I. The wage is equal to the marginal product of labour 
That is to say, the wage of an employed person is equal to the value which would be lost 
if employment were to be reduced by one unit (after deducting any other costs which this 
reduction of output would avoid); subject, however, to the qualification that the equality 
may be disturbed, in accordance with  certain principles, if competition and markets are 
imperfect. 
II.  The  utility  of  the  wage  when  a  given  volume  of  labour  is  employed  is  equal  to  the 
marginal disutility of that amount of employment. 
That is to say, the real wage of an employed person is that which is just sufficient (in the 
estimation of the employed persons themselves) to induce the volume of labour actually 
employed  to  be  forthcoming;  subject  to  the  qualification  that  the  equality  for  each 
individual  unit  of  labour  may  be  disturbed  by  combination  between  employable  units 
analogous to the imperfections of competition which qualify the first postulate. Disutility 
must be here understood to cover every kind of reason which might lead a man, or a body 
of  men,  to  withhold  their  labour  rather  than  accept  a  wage  which  had  to  them  a  utility 
below a certain minimum. 
This  postulate  is  compatible  with  what  may  be  called  'frictional'  unemployment.  For  a 
realistic  interpretation  of  it  legitimately  allows  for  various  inexactnesses  of  adjustment 

which stand in the way of continuous full employment: for example, unemployment due 
to a temporary want of balance between the relative quantities of specialised resources as 
a  result  of  miscalculation  or  intermittent  demand;  or  to  time-lags  consequent  on 
unforeseen changes; or to the fact that the change-over from one employment to another 
cannot be effected without a certain delay, so that there will always exist in a non-static 
society  a  proportion  of  resources  unemployed  'between  jobs'.  In  addition  to  'frictional' 
unemployment, the postulate is also compatible with 'voluntary' unemployment due to the 
refusal or inability of a unit of labour, as a result of legislation or social practices or of 
combination  for  collective  bargaining  or  of slow  response  to  change  or  of  mere  human 
obstinacy, to accept a reward corresponding to the value of the product attributable to its 
marginal  productivity.  But  these  two  categories  of  'frictional'  unemployment  and 
'voluntary'  unemployment  are  comprehensive.  The  classical  postulates  do  not  admit  of 
the  possibility  of  the  third  category,  which  I  shall  define  below  as  'involuntary' 
unemployment. 
Subject  to  these  qualifications,  the  volume  of  employed  resources  is  duly  determined, 
according  to  the  classical  theory,  by  the  two  postulates.  The  first  gives  us  the  demand 
schedule  for  employment,  the  second  gives  us  the  supply  schedule;  and  the  amount  of 
employment is fixed at the point where the utility of  the marginal  product balances  the 
disutility of the marginal employment. It would follow from this that there are only four 
possible means of increasing employment: 
(a)  An  improvement  in  organisation  or  in  foresight  which  diminishes  'frictional' 
unemployment; 
(b)  a  decrease  in  the  marginal  disutility  of  labour,  as  expressed  by  the  real  wage  for 
which additional labour is available, so as to diminish 'voluntary' unemployment; 
(c)  an  increase  in  the  marginal  physical  productivity  of  labour  in  the  wage-goods 
industries  (to  use  Professor  Pigou's  convenient  term  for  goods  upon  the  price  of  which 
the utility of the money-wage depends); 
or (d) an increase in the price of non-wage-goods compared with the price of wage-goods, 
associated with a shift in the expenditure of non-wage-earners from wage-goods to non-
wage-goods. 
This,  to  the  best  of  my  understanding,  is  the  substance  of  Professor  Pigou's  Theory  of 
Unemployment—the only detailed account of the classical theory of employment which 
exists[3]. 
II 
Is  it  true  that  the  above  categories  are  comprehensive  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the 
population generally is seldom doing as much work as it would like to do on the basis of 
the  current  wage?  For,  admittedly,  more  labour  would,  as  a  rule,  be  forthcoming  at  the 
existing  money-wage  if  it  were  demanded[4].  The  classical  school  reconcile  this 

phenomenon with their second postulate by arguing that, while the demand for labour at 
the existing money-wage may be satisfied before everyone willing to work at this wage is 
employed,  this  situation  is  due  to  an  open  or  tacit  agreement  amongst  workers  not  to 
work for less, and that if labour as a whole would agree to a reduction of money-wages 
more employment would be forthcoming. If this is the case, such unemployment, though 
apparently  involuntary,  is  not  strictly  so,  and  ought  to  be  included  under  the  above 
category of 'voluntary' unemployment due to the effects of collective bargaining, etc. 
This calls for two observations, the first of which relates to the actual attitude of workers 
towards real wages and money-wages respectively and is not theoretically fundamental, 
but the second of which is fundamental. 
Let us assume, for the moment, that labour is not prepared to work for a lower money-
wage  and  that  a  reduction  in  the  existing  level  of  money-wages  would  lead,  through 
strikes  or  otherwise,  to  a  withdrawal  from  the  labour  market  of  labour  which  is  now 
employed.  Does  it  follow  from  this  that  the  existing  level  of  real  wages  accurately 
measures the marginal disutility of labour? Not necessarily. For, although a reduction in 
the existing money-wage would lead to a withdrawal of labour, it does not follow that a 
fall  in  the  value  of  the  existing  money-wage in  terms  of  wage-goods  would  do  so,  if  it 
were due to a rise in the price of the latter. In other words, it may be the case that within a 
certain  range  the  demand  of  labour  is  for  a  minimum  money-wage  and  not  for  a 
minimum real wage. The classical school have tacitly assumed that this would involve no 
significant change in their theory. But this is not so. For if the supply of labour is not a 
function of real wages as its sole variable, their argument breaks down entirely and leaves 
the  question  of  what  the  actual  employment  will  be  quite  indeterminate[5].  They  do  not 
seem to have realised that, unless the supply of labour is a function of real wages alone, 
their supply curve for labour will shift bodily with every movement of prices. Thus their 
method is tied up with their very special assumptions, and cannot be adapted to deal with 
the more general case. 
Now ordinary experience tells us, beyond doubt, that a situation where labour stipulates 
(within  limits)  for  a  money-wage  rather  than  a  real  wage,  so  far  from  being  a  mere 
possibility, is the normal case. Whilst workers will usually resist a reduction of money-
wages, it is not their practice to withdraw their labour whenever there is a rise in the price 
of  wage-goods.  It  is  sometimes  said  that  it  would  be  illogical  for  labour  to  resist  a 
reduction of money-wages but not to resist a reduction of real wages. For reasons given 
below (p. 14), this might not be so illogical as it appears at first; and, as we shall see later, 
fortunately so. But, whether logical or illogical, experience shows that this is how labour 
in fact behaves. 
Moreover, the contention that the unemployment which characterises a depression is due 
to a refusal by labour to accept a reduction of money-wages is not clearly supported by 
the facts. It is not very plausible to assert that unemployment in the United States in 1932 
was due either to labour obstinately refusing to accept a reduction of money-wages or to 
its  obstinately  demanding  a  real  wage  beyond  what  the  productivity  of  the  economic 
machine  was  capable  of  furnishing.  Wide  variations  are  experienced  in  the  volume  of 

employment without any apparent change either in the minimum real demands of labour 
or in its productivity. Labour is not more truculent in the depression than in the boom—
far from it. Nor is its physical productivity less. These facts from experience are a prima 
facie ground for questioning the adequacy of the classical analysis. 
It would be interesting to see the results of a statistical enquiry into the actual relationship 
between  changes  in  money-wages  and  changes  in  real  wages.  In  the  case  of  a  change 
peculiar to a particular industry one would expect the change in real wages to be in the 
same direction as the change in money-wages. But in the case of changes in the general 
level of wages, it will be found, I think, that the change in real wages associated with a 
change in money-wages, so far from being usually in the same direction, is almost always 
in the opposite direction. When money-wages are rising, that is to say, it will be found 
that real wages are falling; and when money-wages are falling, real wages are rising. This 
is because, in the short period, falling money-wages and rising real wages are each, for 
independent reasons, likely to  accompany  decreasing  employment;  labour being  readier 
to accept wage-cuts when employment is falling off, yet real wages inevitably rising in 
the  same  circumstances  on  account  of  the  increasing  marginal  return  to  a  given  capital 
equipment when output is diminished. 
If, indeed, it were true that the existing real wage is a minimum below which more labour 
than  is  now  employed  will  not  be  forthcoming  in  any  circumstances,  involuntary 
unemployment,  apart  from  frictional  unemployment,  would  be  non-existent.  But  to 
suppose  that  this  is  invariably  the  case  would  be  absurd.  For  more  labour  than  is  at 
present employed is usually available at the existing money-wage, even though the price 
of wage-goods is rising and, consequently, the real wage falling. If this is true, the wage-
goods  equivalent  of  the  existing  money-wage  is  not  an  accurate  indication  of  the 
marginal disutility of labour, and the second postulate does not hold good. 
But there is a more fundamental objection. The second postulate flows from the idea that 
the  real  wages  of  labour  depend  on  the  wage  bargains  which  labour  makes  with  the 
entrepreneurs.  It  is  admitted,  of  course,  that  the  bargains  are  actually  made  in  terms  of 
money, and even that the real wages acceptable to labour are not altogether independent 
of what the corresponding money-wage happens to be. Nevertheless it is the money-wage 
thus  arrived  at  which  is  held  to  determine  the  real  wage.  Thus  the  classical  theory 
assumes that it is always open to labour to reduce its real wage by accepting a reduction 
in  its  money-wage.  The  postulate  that  there  is  a  tendency  for  the  real  wage  to  come  to 
equality with the marginal disutility of labour clearly presumes that labour itself is in a 
position  to  decide  the  real  wage  for  which  it  works,  though  not  the  quantity  of 
employment forthcoming at this wage. 
The  traditional  theory  maintains,  in  short,  that  the  wage  bargains  between  the 
entrepreneurs  and  the  workers  determine  the  real  wage;  so  that,  assuming  free 
competition  amongst  employers  and  no  restrictive  combination  amongst  workers,  the 
latter can, if they wish, bring their real wages into conformity with the marginal disutility 
of the amount of employment offered by the employers at that wage. If this is not true, 

then there is no longer any reason to expect a tendency towards equality between the real 
wage and the marginal disutility of labour. 
The  classical  conclusions  are  intended,  it  must  be  remembered,  to  apply  to  the  whole 
body of labour and do not mean merely that a single individual can get employment by 
accepting  a  cut  in  money-wages  which  his  fellows  refuse.  They  are  supposed  to  be 
equally applicable to a closed system as to an open system, and are not dependent on the 
characteristics  of  an  open  system  or  on  the  effects  of  a  reduction  of  money-wages  in  a 
single country on its foreign trade, which lie, of course, entirely outside the field of this 
discussion. Nor are they based on indirect effects due to a lower wages-bill in terms of 
money  having  certain  reactions  on  the  banking  system  and  the  state  of  credit,  effects 
which  we  shall  examine  in  detail  in  chapter  19.  They  are  based  on  the  belief  that  in  a 
closed system a reduction in the general level of money-wages will be accompanied, at 
any rate in the short period and subject only to minor qualifications, by some, though not 
always a proportionate, reduction in real wages. 
Now  the  assumption  that  the  general  level  of  real  wages  depends  on  the  money-wage 
bargains  between  the  employers  and  the  workers  is  not  obviously  true.  Indeed  it  is 
strange that so little attempt should have been made to prove or to refute it. For it is far 
from being consistent with the general tenor of the classical theory, which has taught us 
to  believe  that  prices  are  governed  by  marginal  prime  cost  in  terms  of  money  and  that 
money-wages  largely  govern  marginal  prime  cost.  Thus  if  money-wages  change,  one 
would have expected the classical school to argue that prices would change in almost the 
same  proportion,  leaving  the  real  wage  and  the  level  of  unemployment  practically  the 
same as before, any small gain or loss to labour  being at  the expense or profit of other 
elements of marginal cost which have been left unaltered[6]. They seem, however, to have 
been diverted from this line of thought, partly by the settled conviction that labour is in a 
position  to  determine  its  own  real  wage  and  partly,  perhaps,  by  preoccupation  with  the 
idea that prices depend on the quantity of money. And the belief in the proposition that 
labour  is  always  in  a  position  to  determine  its  own  real  wage,  once  adopted,  has  been 
unattained by its being confused with the proposition that labour is always in a position to 
determine what real wage shall correspond to full employment, i.e. the maximum quantity 
of employment which is compatible with a given real wage. 
To sum up: there are two objections to the second postulate of the classical theory. The 
first relates to the actual behaviour of labour. A fall in real wages due to a rise in prices, 
with money-wages unaltered, does not, as a rule, cause the supply of available labour on 
offer at the current wage to fall below the amount actually employed prior to the rise of 
prices.  To  state  it  does  is  to  suppose  that  all  those  who  are  now  unemployed  though 
willing to work at the current wage will withdraw the offer of their labour in the event of 
even a small rise in the cost of living. Yet this strange supposition apparently underlies 
Professor Pigou's Theory of Unemployment[7], and it is what all members of the orthodox 
school are tacitly assuming. 
But  the  other,  more  fundamental,  objection,  which  we  shall  develop  in  the  ensuing 
chapters, flows from our disputing the assumption that the general level of real wages is 

directly  determined  by  the  character  of  the  wage  bargain.  In  assuming  that  the  wage 
bargain determines the real wage the classical school have slept in an illicit assumption. 
For  there  may  be  no  method  available  to  labour  as  a  whole  whereby  it  can  bring  the 
wage-goods  equivalent  of  the  general  level  of  money  wages  into  conformity  with  the 
marginal disutility of the current volume of employment. There may exist no expedient 
by which labour as a whole can reduce its real wage to a given figure by making revised 
money bargains with the entrepreneurs. This will be our contention. We shall endeavour 
to show that primarily it is certain other forces which determine the general level of real 
wages. The attempt to elucidate this problem will be one of our main themes. We shall 
argue  that  there  has  been  a  fundamental  misunderstanding  of  how  in  this  respect  the 
economy in which we live actually works. 
III 
Though the struggle over money-wages between individuals and groups is often believed 
to  determine  the  general  level  of  real-wages,  it  is,  in  fact,  concerned  with  a  different 
object.  Since  there  is  imperfect  mobility  of  labour,  and  wages  do  not  tend  to  an  exact 
equality of net advantage in different occupations, any individual or group of individuals, 
who  consent  to  a  reduction  of  money-wages  relatively  to  others,  will  suffer  a  relative 
reduction  in  real  wages,  which  is  a  sufficient  justification  for  them  to  resist  it.  On  the 
other  hand  it  would  be  impracticable  to  resist  every  reduction  of  real  wages,  due  to  a 
change  in  the  purchasing-power  of  money  which  affects  all  workers  alike;  and  in  fact 
reductions of real wages arising in this way are not, as a rule, resisted unless they proceed 
to an extreme degree. Moreover, a resistance to reductions in money-wages applying to 
particular industries does not raise the same insuperable bar to an increase in aggregate 
employment  which  would  result  from  a  similar  resistance  to  every  reduction  in  real 
wages. 
In other words, the struggle about money-wages primarily affects the distribution of the 
aggregate real wage between different labour-groups, and not its average amount per unit 
of employment, which depends, as we shall see, on a different set of forces. The effect of 
combination on the part of a group of workers is to protect their relative real wage. The 
general level of real wages depends on the other forces of the economic system. 
Thus  it  is  fortunate  that  the  workers,  though  unconsciously,  are  instinctively  more 
reasonable  economists  than  the  classical  school,  inasmuch  as  they  resist  reductions  of 
money-wages,  which  are  seldom  or  never  of  an  all-round  character,  even  though  the 
existing  real  equivalent  of  these  wages  exceeds  the  marginal  disutility  of  the  existing 
employment;  whereas  they  do  not  resist  reductions  of  real  wages,  which  are  associated 
with  increases  in  aggregate  employment  and  leave  relative  money-wages  unchanged, 
unless the reduction proceeds so far as to threaten a reduction of the real wage below the 
marginal disutility of the existing volume of employment. Every trade union will put up 
some resistance to a cut in money-wages, however small. But since no trade union would 
dream of striking on every occasion of a rise in the cost of living, they do not raise the 
obstacle  to  any  increase  in  aggregate  employment  which  is  attributed  to  them  by  the 
classical school. 

IV 
We  must  now  define  the  third  category  of  unemployment,  namely  'involuntary' 
unemployment  in  the  strict  sense,  the  possibility  of  which  the  classical  theory  does  not 
admit. 
Clearly  we  do  not  mean  by  'involuntary'  unemployment  the  mere  existence  of  an 
unexhausted  capacity  to  work.  An  eight-hour  day  does  not  constitute  unemployment 
because  it  is  not  beyond  human  capacity  to  work  ten  hours.  Nor  should  we  regard  as 
'involuntary' unemployment the withdrawal of their labour by a body of workers because 
they  do  not  choose  to  work  for  less  than  a  certain  real  reward.  Furthermore,  it  will  be 
convenient  to  exclude  'frictional'  unemployment  from  our  definition  of  'involuntary' 
unemployment.  My  definition 
involuntarily 
unemployed  If,  in  the  event  of  a  small  rise  in  the  price  of  wage-goods  relatively  to  the 
money-wage, both the aggregate supply of labour willing to work for the current money-
wage  and  the  aggregate  demand  for  it  at  that  wage  would  be  greater  than  the  existing 
volume  of  employment. An alternative definition, which amounts, however, to the same 
thing, will be given in the next chapter (Chapter 3). 
therefore,  as  follows:  Men  are 
is, 
It follows from this definition that the equality of the real wage to the marginal disutility 
of  employment  presupposed  by 
interpreted, 
corresponds to the absence of 'involuntary' unemployment. This state of affairs we shall 
describe  as  'full'  employment,  both  'frictional'  and  'voluntary'  unemployment  being 
consistent  with  'full'  employment  thus  defined.  This  fits  in,  we  shall  find,  with  other 
characteristics of the classical theory, which is best regarded as a theory of distribution in 
conditions  of  full  employment.  So  long  as  the  classical  postulates  hold  good, 
unemployment,  which  is  in  the  above  sense  involuntary,  cannot  occur.  Apparent 
unemployment  must,  therefore,  be  the  result  either  of  temporary  loss  of  work  of  the 
'between  jobs'  type  or  of  intermittent  demand  for  highly  specialised  resources  or  of  the 
effect of a trade union 'closed shop' on the employment of free labour. Thus writers in the 
classical tradition, overlooking the special assumption underlying their theory, have been 
driven  inevitably  to  the  conclusion,  perfectly  logical  on  their  assumption,  that  apparent 
unemployment (apart from the admitted exceptions) must be due at bottom to a refusal by 
the  unemployed  factors  to  accept  a  reward  which  corresponds  to  their  marginal 
productivity.  A  classical  economist  may  sympathise  with  labour  in  refusing  to  accept  a 
cut  in  its  money-wage,  and  he  will  admit  that  it  may  not  be  wise  to  make  it  to  meet 
conditions  which  are  temporary;  but  scientific  integrity  forces  him  to  declare  that  this 
refusal is, nevertheless, at the bottom of the trouble. 
the  second  postulate,  realistically 
Obviously,  however,  if  the  classical  theory  is  only  applicable  to  the  case  of  full 
employment, it is fallacious to apply it to the problems of involuntary unemployment—if 
there be such a thing (and who will deny it?). The classical theorists resemble Euclidean 
geometers  in  a  non-Euclidean  world  who,  discovering  that  in  experience  straight  lines 
apparently  parallel  often  meet,  rebuke  the  lines  for  not  keeping  straight—as  the  only 
remedy  for  the  unfortunate  collisions  which  are  occurring.  Yet,  in  truth,  there  is  no 
remedy  except  to  throw  over  the  axiom  of  parallels  and  to  work  out  a  non-Euclidean 

geometry. Something similar is required to-day in economics. We need to throw over the 
second postulate  of the  classical  doctrine and to  work  out  the  behaviour  of  a  system  in 
which involuntary unemployment in the strict sense is possible. 
V 
In emphasising our point of departure from the classical system, we must not overlook an 
important  point  of  agreement.  For  we  shall  maintain  the  first  postulate  as  heretofore, 
subject only to the same qualifications as in the classical theory; and we must pause, for a 
moment, to consider what this involves. 
It  means  that,  with  a  given  organisation,  equipment  and  technique,  real  wages  and  the 
volume of output (and hence of employment) are uniquely correlated, so that, in general, 
an increase in employment can only occur to the accompaniment of a decline in the rate 
of real wages. Thus I am not disputing this vital fact which the classical economists have 
(rightly)  asserted  as  indefeasible.  In  a  given  state  of  organisation,  equipment  and 
technique, the real wage earned by a unit of labour has a unique (inverse) correlation with 
the volume of employment. Thus if employment increases, then, in the short period, the 
reward  per  unit  of  labour  in  terms  of  wage-goods  must,  in  general,  decline  and  profits 
increase[8]. This is simply the obverse of the familiar proposition that industry is normally 
working subject to decreasing returns in the short period during which equipment etc. is 
assumed to be constant; so that the marginal product in the wage-good industries (which 
governs real wages) necessarily diminishes as employment is increased. So long, indeed, 
as  this  proposition  holds,  any  means  of  increasing  employment  must  lead  at  the  same 
time to a diminution of the marginal product and hence of the rate of wages measured in 
terms of this product. 
But when we have thrown over the second postulate, a decline in employment, although 
necessarily associated with labour's receiving a wage equal in value to a larger quantity of 
wage-goods,  is  not  necessarily  due  to  labour's  demanding  a  larger  quantity  of  wage-
goods;  and  a  willingness  on  the  part  of  labour  to  accept  lower  money-wages  is  not 
necessarily a remedy for unemployment. The theory of wages in relation to employment, 
to  which  we  are  here  leading  up,  cannot  be  fully  elucidated,  however,  until  chapter  19 
and its Appendix have been reached. 
VI 
From  the  time  of  Say  and  Ricardo  the  classical  economists  have  taught  that  supply 
creates  its  own  demand;—meaning  by  this  in  some  significant,  but  not  clearly  defined, 
sense that the whole of the costs of production must necessarily be spent in the aggregate, 
directly or indirectly, on purchasing the product. 
In J.S. Mill's Principles of Political Economy the doctrine is expressly set forth: 
What  constitutes  the  means  of  payment  for  commodities  is  simply 
commodities. Each person's means of paying for the productions of other 

people  consist  of  those  which  he  himself  possesses.  All  sellers  are 
inevitably,  and  by  the  meaning  of  the  word,  buyers.  Could  we  suddenly 
double the productive powers of the country, we should double the supply 
of  commodities  in  every  market;  but  we  should,  by  the  same  stroke, 
double the purchasing power. Everybody would bring a double demand as 
well  as  supply;  everybody  would  be  able  to  buy  twice  as  much,  because 
every one would have twice as much to offer in exchange. 
As  a  corollary  of  the  same  doctrine,  it  has  been  supposed  that  any  individual  act  of 
abstaining  from  consumption  necessarily  leads  to,  and  amounts  to  the  same  thing  as, 
causing  the  labour  and  commodities  thus  released  from  supplying  consumption  to  be 
invested in the production of capital wealth. The following passage from Marshall's Pure 
Theory of Domestic Values[9] illustrates the traditional approach: 
The whole of a man's income is expended in the purchase of services and 
of  commodities.  It  is  indeed  commonly  said  that  a  man  spends  some 
portion  of  his  income  and  saves  another.  But  it  is  a  familiar  economic 
axiom that a man purchases labour and commodities with that portion of 
his income which he saves just as much as he does with that he is said to 
spend. He is said to spend when he seeks to obtain present enjoyment from 
the services and commodities which he purchases. He is said to save when 
he  causes  the  labour  and  the  commodities  which  he  purchases  to  be 
devoted to the production of wealth from which he expects to derive the 
means of enjoyment in the future. 
It  is  true  that  it  would  not  be  easy  to  quote  comparable  passages  from  Marshall's  later 
work[10] or from Edgeworth or Professor Pigou. The doctrine is never stated to-day in this 
crude  form.  Nevertheless  it  still  underlies  the  whole  classical  theory,  which  would 
collapse without it. Contemporary economists, who might hesitate to agree with Mill, do 
not  hesitate  to  accept  conclusions  which  require  Mill's  doctrine  as  their  premises.  The 
conviction,  which  runs,  for  example,  through  almost  all  Professor  Pigou's  work,  that 
money makes no real difference except frictionally and that the theory of production and 
employment  can  be  worked  out  (like  Mill's)  as  being  based  on  'real'  exchanges  with 
money introduced perfunctorily in a later chapter, is the modern version of the classical 
tradition. Contemporary thought is still deeply steeped in the notion that if people do not 
spend  their  money  in  one  way  they  will  spend  it  in  another[11].  Post-war  economists 
seldom, indeed, succeed in maintaining this standpoint consistently; for their thought to-
day is too much permeated with the contrary tendency and with facts of experience too 
obviously inconsistent with their former view[12]. But they have not drawn sufficiently far-
reaching consequences; and have not revised their fundamental theory. 
In the first instance, these conclusions may have been applied to the kind of economy in 
which  we  actually  live  by  false  analogy  from  some  kind  of  non-exchange  Robinson 
Crusoe economy, in which the income which individuals consume or retain as a result of 
their productive activity is, actually and exclusively, the output in specie of that activity. 
But,  apart  from  this,  the  conclusion  that  the  costs  of  output  are  always  covered  in  the 

aggregate by the sale-proceeds resulting from demand, has great plausibility, because it is 
difficult to distinguish it from another, similar-looking proposition which is indubitable, 
namely  that  the  income  derived  in  the  aggregate  by  all  the  elements  in  the  community 
concerned  in  a  productive  activity  necessarily  has  a  value  exactly  equal  to  the  value  of 
the output. 
Similarly  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  the  act  of  an  individual,  by  which  he  enriches 
himself  without  apparently  taking  anything  from  anyone  else,  must  also  enrich  the 
community  as  a  whole;  so  that  (as  in  the  passage  just  quoted  from  Marshall)  an  act  of 
individual  saving  inevitably  leads  to  a  parallel  act  of  investment.  For,  once  more,  it  is 
indubitable  that  the  sum  of  the  net  increments  of  the  wealth  of  individuals  must  be 
exactly equal to the aggregate net increment of the wealth of the community. 
Those  who  think  in  this  way  are  deceived,  nevertheless,  by  an  optical  illusion,  which 
makes  two  essentially  different  activities  appear  to  be  the  same.  They  are  fallaciously 
supposing  that  there  is  a  nexus  which  unites  decisions  to  abstain  from  present 
consumption  with  decisions  to  provide  for  future  consumption;  whereas  the  motives 
which  determine  the  latter  are  not  linked  in  any  simple  way  with  the  motives  which 
determine the former. 
It is, then, the assumption of equality between the demand price of output as a whole and 
its  supply  price  which  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  classical  theory's  'axiom  of  parallels'. 
Granted this, all the rest follows—the social advantages of private and national thrift, the 
traditional attitude towards the rate of interest, the classical theory of unemployment, the 
quantity theory of money, the unqualified advantages of laissez-faire in respect of foreign 
trade and much else which we shall have to question. 
VII 
At  different  points  in  this  chapter  we  have  made  the  classical  theory  to  depend  in 
succession on the assumptions: 
1.  that the real wage is equal to the marginal disutility of the existing employment; 
2.  that there is no such thing as involuntary unemployment in the strict sense; 
3.  that supply creates its own demand in the sense that the aggregate demand price is 
equal to the aggregate supply price for all levels of output and employment. 
These three assumptions, however, all amount to the same thing in the sense that they all 
stand and fall together, any one of them logically involving the other two. 
1. This is in the Ricardian tradition. For Ricardo expressly repudiated any interest in the amount of 
the  national  dividend,  as  distinct  from  its  distribution.  In  this  he  was  assessing  correctly  the 
character of his own theory. But his successors, less clear-sighted, have used the classical theory in 
discussions concerning the causes of wealth. Vide Ricardo’s letter to Malthus of October 9, 1820: 
“Political  Economy  you  think  is  an  enquiry  into  the  nature  and  causes  of  wealth  —  I  think  it 
should be called an enquiry into the laws which determine the division of the produce of industry 
amongst the classes who concur in its formation. No law can be laid down respecting quantity, but 

a  tolerably  correct  one  can  be  laid  down  respecting  proportions.  Every  day  I  am  more  satisfied 
that the former enquiry is vain and delusive, and the latter only the true objects of the science.” 
2.  For  example,  Prof.  Pigou  in  the  Economics  of  Welfare  (4th  ed.  p.  127)  writes  (my  italics): 
“Throughout  this  discussion,  except  when  the  contrary  is  expressly  stated,  the  fact  that  some 
resources are generally unemployed against the will of the owners is ignored. This does not affect 
the substance of the argument, while it simplifies its exposition.”. Thus, whilst Ricardo expressly 
disclaimed any attempt to deal with the amount of the national dividend as a whole, Prof. Pigou, in 
a  book  which  is  specifically  directed  to the  problem  of  the national  dividend,  maintains that the 
same  theory  holds  when  there  is  some  involuntary  unemployment  as  in  the  case  of  full 
employment. 
3. Prof. Pigou’s Theory of Unemployment is examined in more detail in the Appendix to Chapter 19 
below. 
4. Cf. the quotation from Prof. Pigou above, p. 5, footnote. 
5. This point is dealt with in detail in the Appendix to Chapter 19 below. 
6.  This  argument  would,  indeed,  contain,  to  my  thinking,  a  large  element  of  truth,  though  the 
complete results of a change in money-wages are more complex, as we shall show in Chapter 19 
below. 
7. Cf. Chapter 19, Appendix. 
8.  The  argument  runs  as  follows:  n  men  are  employed,  the  nth  man  adds  a  bushel  a  day  to  the 
harvest, and wages have a buying power of a bushel a day. The n + 1 th man, however, would only 
add .9 bushel a day, and employment cannot, therefore, rise to n + 1 men unless the price of corn 
rises  relatively  to  wages  until  daily  wages  have  a  buying  power  of  .9  bushel.  Aggregate  wages 
would  then  amount  to  9/10  (n  +  1)  bushels  as  compared  with  n  bushels  previously.  Thus  the 
employment of an additional man will, if it occurs, necessarily involve a transfer of income from 
those previously in work to the entrepreneurs. 
9. p. 34. 
10. Mr. J. A. Hobson, after quoting in his Physiology of Industry (p. 102) the above passage from Mill, 
points  out  that  Marshall  commented  as  follows  on  this  passage  as  early  as  his  Economics  of 
Industry, p. 154. “But though men have the power to purchase, they may not choose to use it.” 
“But”, Mr Hobson continues, “he fails to grasp the critical importance of this fact, and appears 
to limit its action to periods of ‘crisis’.” This has remained fair comment, I think, in the light of 
Marshall’s later work. 
11.  Cf.  Alfred  and  Mary  Marshall,  Economics  of  Industry,  p.  17:  “It  is  not  good  for  trade  to  have 
dresses  made  of  material  which  wears  out  quickly.  For  if  people  did  not  spend  their  means  on 
buying new dresses they would spend them on giving employment to labour in some other way.” 
The  reader  will  notice  that  I  am  again  quoting  from  the  earlier  Marshall.  The  Marshall  of  the 
Principles  had  become  sufficiently  doubtful  to  be  very  cautious  and  evasive.  But  the  old  ideas 
were never repudiated or rooted out of the basic assumptions of his thought. 
12.  It  is  this  distinction  of  Prof.  Robbins  that  he,  almost  alone,  continues  to  maintain  a  consistent 
scheme of thought, his practical recommendations belonging to the same system as his theory. 
  

 
Chapter 3 
THE PRINCIPLE OF EFFECTIVE DEMAND 
I 
We need, to start with, a few terms which will be defined precisely later. In a given state 
of  technique,  resources  and  costs,  the  employment  of  a  given  volume  of  labour  by  an 
entrepreneur  involves  him  in  two  kinds  of  expense:  first  of  all,  the  amounts  which  he 
pays out to the factors of production (exclusive of other entrepreneurs) for their current 
services, which we shall call the factor cost of the employment in question; and secondly, 
the amounts which he pays out to other entrepreneurs for what he has to purchase from 
them together with the sacrifice which he incurs by employing the equipment instead of 
leaving  it  idle,  which  we  shall  call  the  user  cost  of  the  employment  in  question[1].  The 
excess of the value of the resulting output over the sum of its factor cost and its user cost 
is the profit or, as we shall call it, the income of the entrepreneur. The factor cost is, of 
course, the same thing, looked at from the point of view of the entrepreneur, as what the 
factors of production regard as their income. Thus the factor cost and the entrepreneur's 
profit make up, between them, what we shall define as the total income resulting from the 
employment  given  by  the  entrepreneur.  The  entrepreneur's  profit  thus  defined  is,  as  it 
should  be,  the  quantity  which  he  endeavours  to  maximise  when  he  is  deciding  what 
amount  of  employment  to  offer.  It  is  sometimes  convenient,  when  we  are  looking  at  it 
from  the  entrepreneur's  standpoint,  to  call  the  aggregate  income  (i.e.  factor  cost  plus 
profit) resulting from a given amount of employment the proceeds of that employment. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  aggregate  supply  price[2]  of  the  output  of  a  given  amount  of 
employment is the expectation of proceeds which will just make it worth the while of the 
entrepreneurs to give that employment[3]. 
It  follows  that  in  a  given  situation  of  technique,  resources  and  factor  cost  per  unit  of 
employment, the amount of employment, both in each individual firm and industry and in 
the aggregate, depends on the amount of the proceeds which the entrepreneurs expect to 
receive  from  the  corresponding  output[4].  For  entrepreneurs  will  endeavour  to  fix  the 
amount  of  employment  at  the  level  which  they  expect  to  maximise  the  excess  of  the 
proceeds over the factor cost. 
Let Z be the aggregate supply price of the output from employing N men, the relationship 
between  Z  and  N  being  written  Z  =  φ(N),  which  can  be  called  the  aggregate  supply 
function[5].  Similarly,  let  D  be  the  proceeds  which  entrepreneurs  expect  to  receive  from 
the  employment  of  N  men,  the  relationship  between  D  and  N  being  written  D  =  f(N), 
which can be called the aggregate demand function. 
Now if for a given value of N the expected proceeds are greater than the aggregate supply 
price,  i.e.  if  D  is  greater  than  Z,  there  will  be  an  incentive  to  entrepreneurs  to  increase 
employment beyond N and, if necessary, to raise costs by competing with one another for 

the factors of production, up to the value of N for which Z has become equal to D. Thus 
the  volume  of  employment  is  given  by  the  point  of  intersection  between  the  aggregate 
demand  function  and  the  aggregate  supply  function;  for  it  is  at  this  point  that  the 
entrepreneurs' expectation of profits will be maximised. The value of D at the point of the 
aggregate demand function, where it is intersected by the aggregate supply function, will 
be  called  the  effective  demand.  Since  this  is  the  substance  of  the  General  Theory  of 
Employment,  which  it  will  be  our  object  to  expound,  the  succeeding  chapters  will  be 
largely  occupied  with  examining  the  various  factors  upon  which  these  two  functions 
depend. 
The classical doctrine, on the other hand, which used to be expressed categorically in the 
statement  that  'Supply  creates  its  own  Demand'  and  continues  to  underlie  all  orthodox 
economic theory, involves a special assumption as to the relationship between these two 
functions. For 'Supply creates its own Demand' must mean that f(N) and φ(N) are equal 
for all values of N, i.e. for all levels of output and employment; and that when there is an 
increase  in  Z  ( = φ(N))  corresponding  to  an  increase  in  N,  D  ( = f(N))  necessarily 
increases by the same amount as Z. The classical theory assumes, in other words, that the 
aggregate  demand  price  (or  proceeds)  always  accommodates  itself  to  the  aggregate 
supply  price;  so  that,  whatever  the  value  of  N  may  be,  the  proceeds  D  assume  a  value 
equal  to  the  aggregate  supply  price  Z  which  corresponds  to  N.  That  is  to  say,  effective 
demand, instead of having a unique equilibrium value, is an infinite range of values all 
equally  admissible;  and  the  amount  of  employment  is  indeterminate  except  in  so  far  as 
the marginal disutility of labour sets an upper limit. 
If this were true, competition between entrepreneurs would always lead to an expansion 
of  employment  up  to  the  point  at  which  the  supply  of  output  as  a  whole  ceases  to  be 
elastic, i.e. where a further increase in the value of the effective demand will no longer be 
accompanied by any increase in output. Evidently this amounts to the same thing as full 
employment.  In  the  previous  chapter  we  have  given  a  definition  of  full  employment  in 
terms  of  the  behaviour  of  labour.  An  alternative,  though  equivalent,  criterion  is  that  at 
which  we  have  now  arrived,  namely  a  situation  in  which  aggregate  employment  is 
inelastic in response to an increase in the effective demand for its output. Thus Say's law, 
that the aggregate demand price of output as a whole is equal to its aggregate supply price 
for all volumes of output, is equivalent to the proposition that there is no obstacle to full 
employment.  If,  however,  this  is  not  the  true  law  relating  the  aggregate  demand  and 
supply functions, there is a vitally important chapter of economic theory which remains 
to  be  written  and  without  which  all  discussions  concerning  the  volume  of  aggregate 
employment are futile. 
II 
A  brief  summary  of  the  theory  of  employment  to  be  worked  out  in  the  course  of  the 
following chapters may, perhaps, help the reader at this stage, even though it may not be 
fully intelligible. The terms involved will be more carefully defined in due course. In this 
summary  we  shall  assume  that  the  money-wage  and  other  factor  costs  are  constant  per 
unit  of  labour  employed.  But  this  simplification,  with  which  we  shall  dispense  later,  is 

introduced  solely  to  facilitate  the  exposition.  The  essential  character  of  the  argument  is 
precisely the same whether or not money-wages, etc., are liable to change. 
The  outline  of  our  theory  can  be  expressed  as  follows.  When  employment  increases, 
aggregate real income is increased. The psychology of the community is such that when 
aggregate  real  income  is  increased  aggregate  consumption  is  increased,  but  not  by  so 
much  as  income.  Hence  employers  would  make  a  loss  if  the  whole  of  the  increased 
employment  were  to  be  devoted  to  satisfying  the  increased  demand  for  immediate 
consumption. Thus, to justify any given amount of employment there must be an amount 
of  current  investment  sufficient  to  absorb  the  excess  of  total  output  over  what  the 
community chooses to consume when employment is at the given level. For unless there 
is this amount of investment, the receipts of the entrepreneurs will be less than is required 
to induce them to offer the given amount of employment. It follows, therefore, that, given 
what  we  shall  call  the  community's  propensity  to  consume,  the  equilibrium  level  of 
employment, i.e. the level at which there is no inducement to employers as a whole either 
to expand or to contract employment, will depend on the amount of current investment. 
The  amount  of  current  investment  will  depend,  in  turn,  on  what  we  shall  call  the 
inducement  to  invest;  and  the  inducement  to  invest  will  be  found  to  depend  on  the 
relation  between  the  schedule  of  the  marginal  efficiency  of  capital  and  the  complex  of 
rates of interest on loans of various maturities and risks. 
Thus, given the propensity to consume and the rate of new investment, there will be only 
one level of employment consistent with equilibrium; since any other level will lead to 
inequality  between  the  aggregate  supply  price  of  output  as  a  whole  and  its  aggregate 
demand  price.  This  level  cannot  be  greater  than  full  employment,  i.e.  the  real  wage 
cannot be less than the marginal disutility of labour. But there is no reason in general for 
expecting  it  to  be  equal  to  full  employment.  The  effective  demand  associated  with  full 
employment  is  a  special  case,  only  realised  when  the  propensity  to  consume  and  the 
inducement  to  invest  stand  in  a  particular  relationship  to  one  another.  This  particular 
relationship, which corresponds to the assumptions of the classical theory, is in a sense an 
optimum  relationship.  But  it  can  only  exist  when,  by  accident  or  design,  current 
investment  provides  an  amount  of  demand  just  equal  to  the  excess  of  the  aggregate 
supply price of the output resulting from full employment over what the community will 
choose to spend on consumption when it is fully employed. 
This theory can be summed up in the following propositions: 
(1)  In  a  given  situation  of  technique,  resources  and  costs,  income  (both  money-income 
and real income) depends on the volume of employment N. 
(2)  The  relationship  between  the  community's  income  and  what  it  can  be  expected  to 
spend on consumption, designated by D1, will depend on the psychological characteristic 
of  the  community,  which  we  shall  call  its  propensity  to  consume.  That  is  to  say, 
consumption will depend on the level of aggregate income and, therefore, on the level of 
employment N, except when there is some change in the propensity to consume. 

(3)  The  amount  of  labour  N  which  the  entrepreneurs  decide  to  employ  depends  on  the 
sum (D) of two quantities, namely D1, the amount which the community is expected to 
spend  on  consumption,  and  D2,  the  amount  which  it  is  expected  to  devote  to  new 
investment. D is what we have called above the effective demand. 
(4)  Since D1  + D2  =  D  =    φ(N), where is the aggregate supply function, and since, as 
we have seen in (2) above, D1 is a function of N, which we may write χ(N), depending on 
the propensity to consume, it follows that φ(N) − χ(N)  =   D2. 
(5) Hence the volume of employment in equilibrium depends on (i) the aggregate supply 
function, (ii) the propensity to consume, and (iii) the volume of investment, D2. This is 
the essence of the General Theory of Employment. 
(6) For every value of N there is a corresponding marginal productivity of labour in the 
wage-goods  industries;  and  it  is  this  which  determines  the  real  wage.  (5)  is,  therefore, 
subject  to  the  condition  that  N  cannot  exceed  the  value  which  reduces  the  real  wage  to 
equality with the marginal disutility of labour. This means that not all changes in D are 
compatible with our temporary assumption that money-wages are constant. Thus it will 
be essential to a full statement of our theory to dispense with this assumption. 
(7) On the classical theory, according to which D  =  φ(N) for all values of N, the volume 
of employment is in neutral equilibrium for all values of N less than its maximum value; 
so that the forces of competition between entrepreneurs may be expected to push it to this 
maximum  value.  Only  at  this  point,  on  the  classical  theory,  can  there  be  stable 
equilibrium. 
(8) When employment increases, D1will increase, but not by so much as D; since when 
our income increases our consumption increases also, but not by so much. The key to our 
practical problem is to be found in this psychological law. For it follows from this that 
the greater the volume of employment the greater will be the gap between the aggregate 
supply  price  (Z)  of  the  corresponding  output  and  the  sum  (D1)  which  the  entrepreneurs 
can expect to get back out of the expenditure of consumers. Hence, if there is no change 
in the propensity to consume, employment cannot increase, unless at the same time D2 is 
increasing so as to fill the increasing gap between Z and D1. Thus—except on the special 
assumptions of the classical theory according to which there is some force in operation 
which, when employment increases, always causes D2 to increase sufficiently to fill the 
widening  gap  between  Z  and  D1—the  economic  system  may  find  itself  in  stable 
equilibrium  with  N  at  a  level  below  full  employment,  namely  at  the  level  given  by  the 
intersection of the aggregate demand function with the aggregate supply function. 
Thus  the  volume  of  employment  is  not  determined  by  the  marginal  disutility  of  labour 
measured in terms of real wages, except in so far as the supply of labour available at a 
given  real  wage  sets  a  maximum  level  to  employment.  The  propensity  to  consume  and 
the rate of new investment determine between them the volume of employment, and the 
volume of employment is uniquely related to a given level of real wages—not the other 
way  round.  If  the  propensity  to  consume  and  the  rate  of  new  investment  result  in  a 

deficient effective demand, the actual level of employment will fall short of the supply of 
labour potentially available at the existing real wage, and the equilibrium real wage will 
be greater than the marginal disutility of the equilibrium level of employment. 
This analysis supplies us with an explanation of the paradox of poverty in the midst of 
plenty.  For  the  mere  existence  of  an  insufficiency  of  effective  demand  may,  and  often 
will, bring the increase of employment to a standstill before a level of full employment 
has  been  reached.  The  insufficiency  of  effective  demand  will  inhibit  the  process  of 
production in spite of the fact that the marginal product of labour still exceeds in value 
the marginal disutility of employment. 
Moreover the richer the community, the wider will tend to be the gap between its actual 
and its potential production; and therefore the more obvious and outrageous the defects of 
the economic system. For a poor community will be prone to consume by far the greater 
part  of  its  output,  so  that  a  very  modest  measure  of  investment  will  be  sufficient  to 
provide  full  employment;  whereas  a  wealthy  community  will  have  to  discover  much 
ampler  opportunities  for  investment  if  the  saving  propensities  of  its  wealthier  members 
are  to  be  compatible  with  the  employment  of  its  poorer  members.  If  in  a  potentially 
wealthy community the inducement to invest is weak, then, in spite of its potential wealth, 
the working of the principle of effective demand will compel it to reduce its actual output, 
until,  in  spite  of  its  potential  wealth,  it  has  become  so  poor  that  its  surplus  over  its 
consumption is sufficiently diminished to correspond to the weakness of the inducement 
to invest. 
But  worse  still.  Not  only  is  the  marginal  propensity  to  consume[6]  weaker  in  a  wealthy 
community,  but,  owing  to  its  accumulation  of  capital  being  already  larger,  the 
opportunities for further investment are less attractive unless the rate of interest falls at a 
sufficiently  rapid  rate;  which  'brings  us  to  the  theory  of  the  rate  of  interest  and  to  the 
reasons  why  it  does  not  automatically  fall  to  the  appropriate  level,  which  will  occupy 
Book IV. 
Thus the analysis of the propensity to consume, the definition of the marginal efficiency 
of  capital  and  the  theory  of  the  rate  of  interest  are  the  three  main  gaps  in  our  existing 
knowledge which it will be necessary to fill. When this has been accomplished, we shall 
find that the theory of prices falls into its proper place as a matter which is subsidiary to 
our general theory. We shall discover, however, that money plays an essential part in our 
theory  of  the  rate  of  interest;  and  we  shall  attempt  to  disentangle  the  peculiar 
characteristics of money which distinguish it from other things. 
III 
The idea that we can safely neglect the aggregate demand function is fundamental to the 
Ricardian economics, which underlie what we have been taught for more than a century. 
Malthus,  indeed,  had  vehemently  opposed  Ricardo's  doctrine  that  it  was  impossible  for 
effective  demand  to  be  deficient;  but  vainly.  For,  since  Malthus  was  unable  to  explain 
clearly (apart from an appeal to the facts of common observation) how and why effective 

demand could be deficient or excessive, he failed to furnish an alternative construction; 
and Ricardo conquered England as completely as the Holy Inquisition conquered Spain. 
Not only was his theory accepted by the city, by statesmen and by the academic world. 
But controversy ceased; the other point of view completely disappeared; it ceased to be 
discussed.  The  great  puzzle  of  effective  demand  with  which  Malthus  had  wrestled 
vanished from economic literature. You will not find it mentioned even once in the whole 
works  of  Marshall,  Edgeworth  and  Professor  Pigou,  from  whose  hands  the  classical 
theory has received its most mature embodiment. It could only live on furtively, below 
the surface, in the underworlds of Karl Marx, Silvio Gesell or Major Douglas. 
The completeness of the Ricardian victory is something of a curiosity and a mystery. It 
must have been due to a complex of suitabilities in the doctrine to the environment into 
which it was projected. That it reached conclusions quite different from what the ordinary 
uninstructed  person  would  expect,  added,  I  suppose,  to  its  intellectual  prestige.  That  its 
teaching, translated into practice, was austere and often unpalatable, lent it virtue. That it 
was adapted to carry a vast and consistent logical superstructure, gave it beauty. That it 
could explain much social injustice and apparent cruelty as an inevitable incident in the 
scheme of progress, and the attempt to change such things as likely on the whole to do 
more  harm  than  good,  commended  it  to  authority.  That  it  afforded  a  measure  of 
justification to the free activities of the individual capitalist, attracted to it the support of 
the dominant social force behind authority. 
But although the doctrine itself has remained unquestioned by orthodox economists up to 
a late date, its signal failure for purposes of scientific prediction has greatly impaired, in 
the  course  of  time,  the  prestige  of  its  practitioners.  For  professional  economists,  after 
Malthus, were apparently unmoved by the lack of correspondence between the results of 
their theory and the facts of observation;—a discrepancy which the ordinary man has not 
failed  to  observe,  with  the  result  of  his  growing  unwillingness  to  accord  to  economists 
that  measure  of  respect  which  he  gives  to  other  groups  of  scientists  whose  theoretical 
results are confirmed by observation when they are applied to the facts. 
The  celebrated  optimism  of  traditional  economic  theory,  which  has  led  to  economists 
being  looked  upon  as  Candides,  who,  having  left  this  world  for  the  cultivation  of  their 
gardens, teach that all is for the best in the best of all possible worlds provided we will let 
well alone, is also to be traced, I think, to their having neglected to take account of the 
drag on prosperity which can be exercised by an insufficiency of effective demand. For 
there  would  obviously  be  a  natural  tendency  towards  the  optimum  employment  of 
resources in a society which was functioning after the manner of the classical postulates. 
It may well be that the classical theory represents the way in which we should like our 
economy  to  behave.  But  to  assume  that  it  actually  does  so  is  to  assume  our  difficulties 
away. 
1. A precise definition of user cost will be given in Chapter 6. 
2. Not to be confused (vide infra) with the supply price of a unit of output in the ordinary sense of 
this term. 

3.  The  reader  will  observe  that  I  am  deducting  the  user  cost  both  from  the  proceeds  and  from  the 
aggregate supply price of a given volume of output, so that both these terms are to be interpreted 
net of user cost; whereas the aggregate sums paid by the purchasers are, of course, gross of user 
cost. The reasons why this is convenient will be given in Chapter 6. The essential point is that the 
aggregate  proceeds  and  aggregate  supply  price  net  of  user  cost  can  be  defined  uniquely  and 
unambiguously; whereas, since user cost is obviously dependent both on the degree of integration 
of  industry  and  on  the  extent  to  which  entrepreneurs  buy  from  one  another,  there  can  be  no 
definition of the aggregate sums paid by purchasers, inclusive of user cost, which is independent of 
these factors. There is a similar difficulty even in defining supply price in the ordinary sense for an 
individual  producer;  and  in  the  case  of  the  aggregate  supply  price  of  output  as  a  whole  serious 
difficulties  of  duplication  are  involved,  which  have  not  always  been  faced.  If  the  term  is  to  be 
interpreted gross of user cost, they can only be overcome by making special assumptions relating 
to  the  integration  of  entrepreneurs  in  groups  according  as  they  produce  consumption-goods  or 
capital-goods which are obscure and complicated in themselves and do not correspond to the facts. 
If, however, aggregate supply price is defined as above net of user cost, the difficulties do not arise. 
The reader is advised, however, to await the fuller discussion in Chapter 6 and its appendix. 
4. An entrepreneur, who has to reach a practical decision as to his scale of production, does not, of 
course, entertain a single undoubting expectation of what the sale-proceeds of a given output will 
be, but several hypothetical expectations held with varying degrees of probability and definiteness. 
By  his  expectation  of  proceeds  I  mean,  therefore,  that  expectation  of  proceeds  which,  if  it  were 
held  with  certainty,  would  lead  to  the  same  behaviour  as  does  the  bundle  of  vague  and  more 
various possibilities which actually makes up his state of expectation when he reaches his decision. 
5. In Chapter 20 a function closely related to the above will be called the employment function. 
6. Defined in Chapter 10, below. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
Chapter 4 
THE CHOICE OF UNITS 
I 
In  this  and  the  next  three  chapters  we  shall  be  occupied  with  an  attempt  to  clear  up 
certain perplexities which have no peculiar or exclusive relevance to the problems which 
it is our special purpose to examine. Thus these chapters are in the nature of a digression, 
which will prevent us for a time from pursuing our main theme. Their subject-matter is 
only discussed here because it does not happen to have been already treated elsewhere in 
a way which I find adequate to the needs of my own particular enquiry. 
The  three  perplexities  which  most  impeded  my  progress  in  writing  this  book,  so  that  I 
could  not  express  myself  conveniently  until  I  had  found  some  solution  for  them,  are: 
firstly,  the  choice  of  the  units  of  quantity  appropriate  to  the  problems  of  the  economic 
system as a whole; secondly, the part played by expectation in economic analysis; and, 
thirdly, the definition of income. 
II 
That the units, in terms of which economists commonly work, are unsatisfactory can be 
illustrated  by  the  concepts  of  the  national  dividend,  the  stock  of  real  capital  and  the 
general price-level: 
(i)  The  national  dividend,  as  defined  by  Marshall  and  Professor  Pigou[1],  measures  the 
volume of current output or real income and not the value of output or money-income[2]. 
Furthermore, it depends, in some sense, on net output;—on the net addition, that is to say, 
to  the  resources  of  the  community  available for  consumption  or  for  retention  as  capital 
stock, due to the economic activities and sacrifices of the current period, after allowing 
for the wastage of the stock of real capital existing at the commencement of the period. 
On this basis an attempt is made to erect a quantitative science. But it is a grave objection 
to this definition for such a purpose that the community's output of goods and services is 
a  non-homogeneous  complex  which  cannot  be  measured,  strictly  speaking,  except  in 
certain special cases, as for example when all the items of one output are included in the 
same proportions in another output. 
(ii) The difficulty is even greater when, in order to calculate net output, we try to measure 
the net addition  to capital  equipment; for we have  to  find  some  basis  for  a  quantitative 
comparison between the new items of equipment produced during the period and the old 
items  which  have  perished  by  wastage.  In  order  to  arrive  at  the  net  national  dividend, 
Professor Pigou[3] deducts such obsolescence, etc., 'as may fairly be called "normal"; and 
the practical test of normality is that the depletion is sufficiently regular to be foreseen, if 
not in detail, at least in the large'. But, since this deduction is not a deduction in terms of 

money,  he  is  involved  in  assuming  that  there  can  be  a  change  in  physical  quantity, 
although  there  has  been  no  physical  change;  i.e.  he  is  covertly  introducing  changes  in 
value. 
Moreover,  he  is  unable  to  devise  any  satisfactory  formula[4]  to  evaluate  new  equipment 
against old when, owing to changes in technique, the two are not identical. I believe that 
the concept at which Professor Pigou is aiming is the right and appropriate concept for 
economic analysis. But, until a satisfactory system of units has been adopted, its precise 
definition is an impossible task. The problem of comparing one real output with another 
and  of  then  calculating  net  output  by  setting  off  new  items  of  equipment  against  the 
wastage of old items presents conundrums which permit, one can confidently say, of no 
solution. 
(iii)  Thirdly,  the  well-known,  but  unavoidable,  element  of  vagueness  which  admittedly 
attends the concept of the general price-level makes this term very unsatisfactory for the 
purposes of a causal analysis, which ought to be exact. 
Nevertheless  these  difficulties  are  rightly  regarded  as  'conundrums'.  They  are  'purely 
theoretical' in the sense that they never perplex, or indeed enter in any way into, business 
decisions  and  have  no  relevance  to  the  causal  sequence  of  economic  events,  which  are 
clear-cut and determinate in spite of the quantitative indeterminacy of these concepts. It is 
natural,  therefore,  to  conclude  that  they  not  only  lack  precision  but  are  unnecessary. 
Obviously  our  quantitative  analysis  must  be  expressed  without  using  any  quantitatively 
vague expressions. And, indeed, as soon as one makes the attempt, it becomes clear, as I 
hope to show, that one can get on much better without them. 
The  fact  that  two  incommensurable  collections  of  miscellaneous  objects  cannot  in 
themselves provide the material for a quantitative analysis need not, of course, prevent us 
from making approximate statistical comparisons, depending on some broad element of 
judgment  rather  than  of  strict  calculation,  which  may  possess  significance  and  validity 
within certain limits. 
But the proper place for such things as net real output and the general level of prices lies 
within  the  field  of  historical  and  statistical  description,  and  their  purpose  should  be  to 
satisfy historical or social curiosity, a purpose for which perfect precision—such as our 
causal  analysis  requires,  whether  or  not  our  knowledge  of  the  actual  values  of  the 
relevant quantities is complete or exact—is neither usual nor necessary. To say that net 
output to-day is greater, but the price-level lower, than ten years ago or one year ago, is a 
proposition of a similar character to the statement that Queen Victoria was a better queen 
but not a happier woman than Queen Elizabeth—a proposition not without meaning and 
not without interest, but unsuitable as material for the differential calculus. Our precision 
will be a mock precision if we try to use such partly vague and non-quantitative concepts 
as the basis of a quantitative analysis. 
 

III 
On  every  particular  occasion,  let  it  be  remembered,  an  entrepreneur  is  concerned  with 
decisions as to the scale on which to work a given capital equipment; and when we say 
that  the  expectation  of  an  increased  demand,  i.e.  a  raising  of  the  aggregate  demand 
function,  will  lead  to  an  increase  in  aggregate  output,  we  really  mean  that  the  firms, 
which own the capital equipment, will be induced to associate with it a greater aggregate 
employment  of  labour.  In  the  case  of  an  individual  firm  or  industry  producing  a 
homogeneous product we can speak legitimately, if we wish, of increases or decreases of 
output.  But  when  we  are  aggregating  the  activities  of  all  firms,  we  cannot  speak 
accurately except in terms of quantities of employment applied to a given equipment. The 
concepts of output as a whole and its price-level are not required in this context, since we 
have no need of an absolute measure of current aggregate output, such as would enable us 
to  compare  its  amount  with  the  amount  which  would  result  from  the  association  of  a 
different capital equipment with a different quantity of employment. When, for purposes 
of description or rough comparison, we wish to speak of an increase of output, we must 
rely on the general presumption that the amount of employment associated with a given 
capital equipment will be a satisfactory index of the amount of resultant output;—the two 
being  presumed  to  increase  and  decrease  together,  though  not  in  a  definite  numerical 
proportion. 
In dealing with the theory of employment I propose, therefore, to make use of only two 
fundamental  units  of  quantity,  namely,  quantities  of  money-value  and  quantities  of 
employment. The first of these is strictly homogeneous, and the second can be made so. 
For, in so far as different grades and kinds of labour and salaried assistance enjoy a more 
or  less  fixed  relative  remuneration,  the  quantity  of  employment  can  be  sufficiently 
defined  for  our  purpose  by  taking  an  hour's  employment  of  ordinary  labour  as  our  unit 
and weighting an hour's employment of special labour in proportion to its remuneration; 
i.e. an hour of special labour remunerated at double ordinary rates will count as two units. 
We shall call the unit in which the quantity of employment is measured the labour-unit; 
and  the  money-wage  of  a  labour-unit  we  shall  call  the  wage-unit[5].  Thus,  if  E  is  the 
wages  (and  salaries)  bill,  W  the  wage-unit,  and  N  the  quantity  of  employment, 
E  =  N × W. 
This assumption of homogeneity in the supply of labour is not upset by the obvious fact 
of great differences in the specialised skill of individual workers and in their suitability 
for different occupations. For, if the remuneration of the workers is proportional to their 
efficiency,  the  differences  are  dealt  with  by  our  having  regarded  individuals  as 
contributing  to  the  supply  of  labour  in  proportion  to  their  remuneration;  whilst  if,  as 
output increases, a given firm has to bring in labour which is less and less efficient for its 
special purposes per wage-unit paid to it, this is merely one factor among others leading 
to a diminishing return from the capital equipment in terms of output as more labour is 
employed on it. We subsume, so to speak, the non-homogeneity of equally remunerated 
labour  units  in  the  equipment,  which  we  regard  as  less  and  less  adapted  to  employ  the 
available labour units as output increases, instead of regarding the available labour units 
as  less  and  less  adapted  to  use  a  homogeneous  capital  equipment.  Thus  if  there  is  no 

surplus  of  specialised  or  practised  labour  and  the  use  of  less  suitable  labour  involves  a 
higher labour cost per unit of output, this means that the rate at which the return from the 
equipment  diminishes  as  employment  increases  is  more  rapid  than  it  would  be  if  there 
were  such  a  surplus[6].  Even  in  the  limiting  case  where  different  labour  units  were  so 
highly specialised as to be altogether incapable of being substituted for one another, there 
is no awkwardness; for this merely means that the elasticity of supply of output from a 
particular type of capital equipment falls suddenly to zero when all the available labour 
specialised to its use is already employed[7]. Thus our assumption of a homogeneous unit 
of  labour  involves  no  difficulties  unless  there  is  great  instability  in  the  relative 
remuneration  of  different  labour-units;  and  even  this  difficulty  can  be  dealt  with,  if  it 
arises, by supposing a rapid liability to change in the supply of labour and the shape of 
the aggregate supply function. 
It  is  my  belief  that  much  unnecessary  perplexity  can  be  avoided  if  we  limit  ourselves 
strictly to the two units, money and labour, when we are dealing with the behaviour of the 
economic  system  as  a  whole;  reserving  the  use  of  units  of  particular  outputs  and 
equipments  to  the  occasions  when  we  are  analysing  the  output  of  individual  firms  or 
industries in isolation; and the use of vague concepts, such as the quantity of output as a 
whole, the quantity of capital equipment as a whole and the general level of prices, to the 
occasions  when  we  are  attempting  some  historical  comparison  which  is  within  certain 
(perhaps fairly wide) limits avowedly imprecise and approximate. 
It follows that we shall measure changes in current output by reference to the number of 
hours  of  labour  paid  for  (whether  to  satisfy  consumers  or  to  produce  fresh  capital 
equipment) on the existing capital equipment, hours of skilled labour being weighted in 
proportion to their remuneration. We have no need of a quantitative comparison between 
this output and the output which would result from associating a different set of workers 
with  a  different  capital  equipment.  To  predict  how  entrepreneurs  possessing  a  given 
equipment will respond to a shift in the aggregate demand function it is not necessary to 
know how the quantity of the resulting output, the standard of life and the general level of 
prices would compare with what they were at a different date or in another country. 
IV 
It is easily shown that the conditions of supply, such as are usually expressed in terms of 
the supply curve, and the elasticity of supply relating output to price, can be handled in 
terms  of  our  two  chosen  units  by  means  of  the  aggregate  supply  function,  without 
reference  to  quantities  of  output,  whether  we  are  concerned  with  a  particular  firm  or 
industry  or  with  economic  activity  as  a  whole.  For  the  aggregate  supply  function  for  a 
given firm (and similarly for a given industry or for industry as a whole) is given by 
Zr  =  φ r(Nr), 
where Zr is the proceeds (net of user cost) the expectation of which will induce a level of 
employment Nr. If, therefore, the relation between employment and output is such that an 
employment Nr results in an output Or, where Or  =  ψ r(Nr), it follows that 

        Zr + Ur(Nr)                 φr(Nr) + Ur(Nr) 
p  =  ———————  =   ————————— 
       Or                               ψr(Nr) 
is the ordinary supply curve, where Ur(Nr) is the (expected) user cost corresponding to a 
level of employment Nr. 
Thus in the case of each homogeneous commodity, for which Or  =  ψ r(Nr) has a definite 
meaning,  we  can  evaluate  Zr  =  φ r(Nr)  in  the  ordinary  way;  but  we  can  then  aggregate 
the  Nr's  in  a  way  in  which  we  cannot  aggregate  the  Or's,  since  ΣOr  is  not  a  numerical 
quantity.  Moreover,  if  we  can  assume  that,  in  a  given  environment,  a  given  aggregate 
employment will be distributed in a unique way between different industries, so that Nr is 
a function of N, further simplifications are possible. 
1. Vide Pigou, Economics of Welfare, passim, and particularly Part I. chap. iii. 
2.  Though,  as  a  convenient  compromise,  the  real  income,  which  is  taken  to  constitute  the  National 
Dividend, is usually limited to those goods and services which can be bought for money. 
3.  Economics  of  Welfare,  Part  I.  chap.  v.,  on  “What  is  meant  by  maintaining  Capital  intact”;  as 
amended by a recent article in the Economic Journal, June 1935, p. 225. 
4. Cf. Prof. Hayek’s criticisms, Economica, Aug. 1935, p. 247. 
5. If X stands for any quantity measured in terms of money, it will often be convenient to write Xw 
for the same quantity measured in terms of the wage-unit. 
6. This is the main reason why the supply price of output rises with increasing demand even when 
there is still a surplus of equipment identical in type with the equipment in use. If we suppose that 
the surplus supply of labour forms a pool equally available to all entrepreneurs and that labour 
employed for a given purpose is rewarded, in part at least, per unit of effort and not with strict 
regard  to  its  efficiency  in  its  actual  particular  employment  (which  is  in  most  cases  the  realistic 
assumption to make), the diminishing efficiency of the labour employed is an outstanding example 
of rising supply price with increasing output, not due to internal diseconomies. 
7. How the supply curve in ordinary use is supposed to deal with the above difficulty I cannot say, 
since  those  who  use  this  curve  have  not  made  their  assumptions  very  clear.  Probably  they  are 
assuming  that  labour  employed  for  a  given  purpose  is  always  rewarded  with  strict  regard  to  its 
efficiency  for  that  purpose.  But  this  is  unrealistic.  Perhaps  the  essential  reason  for  treating  the 
varying  efficiency  of  labour  as  though  it  belonged  to  the  equipment  lies  in  the  fact  that  the 
increasing surpluses, which emerge as output is increased, accrue in practice mainly to the owners 
of  the  equipment  and  not  to  the  more  efficient  workers  (though  these  may  get  an  advantage 
through being employed more regularly and by receiving earlier promotion); that is to say, men of 
differing efficiency working at the same job are seldom paid at rates closely proportional to their 
efficiencies. Where, however, increased pay for higher efficiency occurs, and in so far as it occurs, 
my  method  takes  account  of  it;  since  in  calculating  the  number  of  labour  units  employed,  the 
individual  workers  are  weighted  in  proportion  to  their  remuneration.  On  my  assumptions 
interesting complications obviously arise where we are dealing with particular supply curves since 
their  shape  will  depend  on  the  demand  for  suitable  labour  in  other  directions.  To  ignore  these 
complications  would, as  I  have  said,  be  unrealistic.  But  we  need  not consider  them  when  we are 
dealing with employment as a whole, provided we assume that a given volume of effective demand 
has a particular distribution of this demand between different products uniquely associated with it. 

It  may  be,  however,  that  this  would  not  hold  good  irrespective  of  the  particular  cause  of  the 
change in demand. E.g. an increase in effective demand due to an increased propensity to consume 
might  find  itself  faced  by  a  different  aggregate  supply  function  from  that  which  would  face  an 
equal increase in demand due to an increased inducement to invest. All this, however, belongs to 
the  detailed  analysis  of  the  general  ideas  here  set  forth,  which  it  is  no  part  of  my  immediate 
purpose to pursue. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
Chapter 5 
EXPECTATION AS DETERMINING OUTPUT AND EMPLOYMENT 
I 
All  production  is  for  the  purpose  of  ultimately  satisfying  a  consumer.  Time  usually 
elapses,  however—and  sometimes  much  time—between  the  incurring  of  costs  by  the 
producer  (with  the  consumer  in  view)  and  the  purchase  of  the  output  by  the  ultimate 
consumer. Meanwhile the entrepreneur (including both the producer and the investor in 
this description) has to form the best expectations he can as to what the consumers will be 
prepared to pay when he is ready to supply them (directly or indirectly) after the elapse of 
what  may  be  a  lengthy  period;  and  he  has  no  choice  but  to  be  guided  by  these 
expectations[1], if he is to produce at all by processes which occupy time. 
These expectations, upon which business decisions depend, fall into two groups, certain 
individuals  or  firms  being  specialised  in  the  business  of  framing  the  first  type  of 
expectation and others in the business of framing the second. The first type is concerned 
with the price which a manufacturer can expect to get for his 'finished' output at the time 
when  he  commits  himself  to  starting  the  process  which  will  produce  it;  output  being 
'finished' (from the point of view of the manufacturer) when it is ready to be used or to be 
sold to a second party. The second type is concerned with what the entrepreneur can hope 
to earn in the shape of future returns if he purchases (or, perhaps, manufactures) 'finished' 
output  as  an  addition  to  his  capital  equipment.  We  may  call  the  former  short-term 
expectation and the latter long-term expectation. 
Thus  the  behaviour  of  each  individual  firm  in  deciding  its  daily[2]  output  will  be 
determined  by  its  short-term  expectations—expectations  as  to  the  cost  of  output  on 
various possible scales and expectations as to the sale-proceeds of this output; though, in 
the case of additions to capital equipment and even of sales to distributors, these short-
term expectations will largely depend on the long-term (or medium-term) expectations of 
other parties. It is upon these various expectations that the amount of employment which 
the  firms  offer  will  depend.  The  actually  realised  results  of  the  production  and  sale  of 
output  will  only  be  relevant  to  employment  in  so  far  as  they  cause  a  modification  of 
subsequent  expectations.  Nor,  on  the  other  hand,  are  the  original  expectations  relevant, 
which led the firm to acquire the capital equipment and the stock of intermediate products 
and half-finished materials with which it finds itself at the time when it has to decide the 
next day's output. Thus, on each and every occasion of such a decision, the decision will 
be made, with reference indeed to this equipment and stock, but in the light of the current 
expectations of prospective costs and sale-proceeds. 
Now,  in  general,  a  change  in  expectations  (whether  short-term  or  long-term)  will  only 
produce  its  full  effect  on  employment  over  a  considerable  period.  The  change  in 
employment due to a change in expectations will not be the same on the second day after 

the change as on the first, or the same on the third day as on the second, and so on, even 
though there be no further change in expectations. In the case of short-term expectations 
this  is  because  changes  in  expectation  are  not,  as  a  rule,  sufficiently  violent  or  rapid, 
when  they  are  for  the  worse,  to  cause  the  abandonment  of  work  on  all  the  productive 
processes which, in the light of the revised expectation, it was a mistake to have begun; 
whilst, when they are for the better, some time for preparation must needs elapse before 
employment can reach the level at which it would have stood if the state of expectation 
had been revised sooner. In the case of long-term expectations, equipment which will not 
be replaced will continue to give employment until it is worn out; whilst when the change 
in long-term expectations is for the better, employment may be at a higher level at first, 
than it will be after there has been time to adjust the equipment to the new situation. 
If  we  suppose  a  state  of  expectation  to  continue  for  a  sufficient  length  of  time  for  the 
effect  on  employment  to  have  worked  itself  out  so  completely  that  there  is,  broadly 
speaking, no piece of employment going on which would not have taken place if the new 
state  of  expectation  had  always  existed,  the  steady  level  of  employment[3]  thus  attained 
may be called the long-period employment corresponding to that state of expectation. It 
follows  that,  although  expectation  may  change  so  frequently  that  the  actual  level  of 
employment  has  never  had  time  to  reach  the  long-period  employment  corresponding  to 
the  existing  state  of  expectation,  nevertheless  every  state  of  expectation  has  its  definite 
corresponding level of long-period employment. 
Let  us  consider,  first  of  all,  the  process  of  transition  to  a  long-period  position  due  to  a 
change  in  expectation,  which  is  not  confused  or  interrupted  by  any  further  change  in 
expectation.  We  will  first  suppose  that  the  change  is  of  such  a  character  that  the  new 
long-period employment will be greater than the old. Now, as a rule, it will only be the 
rate of input which will be much affected at the beginning, that is to say, the volume of 
work  on  the  earlier  stages  of  new  processes  of  production,  whilst  the  output  of 
consumption-goods and the amount of employment on the later stages of processes which 
were  started  before  the  change  will  remain  much  the  same  as  before.  In  so  far  as  there 
were stocks of partly finished goods, this conclusion may be modified; though it is likely 
to remain true that the initial increase in employment will be modest. As, however, the 
days  pass  by,  employment  will  gradually  increase.  Moreover,  it  is  easy  to  conceive  of 
conditions  which  will  cause  it  to  increase  at  some  stage  to  a  higher  level  than  the  new 
long-period employment. For the process of building up capital to satisfy the new state of 
expectation  may  lead  to  more  employment  and  also  to  more  current  consumption  than 
will  occur  when  the  long-period  position  has  been  reached.  Thus  the  change  in 
expectation may lead to a gradual crescendo in the level of employment, rising to a peak 
and then declining to the new  long-period  level.  The same  thing  may  occur  even  if  the 
new  long-period  level  is  the  same  as  the  old,  if  the  change  represents  a  change  in  the 
direction  of  consumption  which  renders  certain  existing  processes  and  their  equipment 
obsolete. Or again, if the new long-period employment is less than the old, the level of 
employment  during  the  transition  may  fall  for  a  time  below  what  the  new  long-period 
level  is  going  to  be.  Thus  a  mere  change  in  expectation  is  capable  of  producing  an 
oscillation of the same kind of shape as a cyclical movement, in the course of working 
itself out. It was movements of this kind which I discussed in my Treatise on Money in 

connection with the building up or the depletion of stocks of working and liquid capital 
consequent on change. 
An uninterrupted process of transition, such as the above, to a new long-period position 
can  be  complicated  in  detail.  But  the  actual  course  of  events  is  more  complicated  still. 
For  the  state  of  expectation  is  liable  to  constant  change,  a  new  expectation  being 
superimposed  long  before  the  previous  change  has  fully  worked  itself  out;  so  that  the 
economic machine is occupied at any given time with a number of overlapping activities, 
the existence of which is due to various past states of expectation. 
II 
This leads us to the relevance of this discussion for our present purpose. It is evident from 
the above that the level of employment at any time depends, in a sense, not merely on the 
existing  state  of  expectation  but  on  the  states  of  expectation  which  have  existed  over  a 
certain  past  period.  Nevertheless  past  expectations,  which  have  not  yet  worked 
themselves out, are embodied in the to-day's capital equipment with reference to which 
the entrepreneur has to make to-day's decisions, and only influence his decisions in so far 
as  they  are  so  embodied.  It  follows,  therefore,  that,  in  spite  of  the  above,  to-day's 
employment can be correctly described as being governed by to-day's expectations taken 
in conjunction with to-day's capital equipment. 
Express  reference  to  current  long-term  expectations  can  seldom  be  avoided.  But  it  will 
often be safe to omit express reference to short-term expectation, in view of the fact that 
in practice the process of revision of short-term expectation is a gradual and continuous 
one, carried on largely in the light of realised results; so that expected and realised results 
run into and overlap one another in their influence. For, although output and employment 
are determined by the producer's short-term expectations and not by past results, the most 
recent results usually play a predominant part in determining what these expectations are. 
It would be too complicated to work out the expectations de novo whenever a productive 
process was being started; and it would, moreover, be a waste of time since a large part of 
the  circumstances  usually  continue  substantially  unchanged  from  one  day  to  the  next. 
Accordingly it is sensible for producers to base their expectations on the assumption that 
the  most  recently  realised  results  will  continue,  except  in  so  far  as  there  are  definite 
reasons  for  expecting  a  change.  Thus  in  practice  there  is  a  large  overlap  between  the 
effects  on  employment  of  the  realised  sale-proceeds  of  recent  output  and  those  of  the 
sale-proceeds  expected  from  current  input;  and  producers'  forecasts  are  more  often 
gradually modified in the light of results than in anticipation of prospective changes[4]. 
Nevertheless, we must not forget that, in the case of durable goods, the producer's short-
term expectations are based on the current long-term expectations of the investor; and it 
is of the nature of long-term expectations that they cannot be checked at short intervals in 
the  light  of  realised  results.  Moreover,  as  we  shall  see  in  chapter  12,  where  we  shall 
consider long-term expectations in more detail, they are liable to sudden revision. Thus 
the factor of current long-term expectations cannot be even approximately eliminated or 
replaced by realised results. 

1.  For  the  method  of  arriving  at  an  equivalent  of  these  expectations  in  terms  of  sale-proceeds  see 
footnote (3) to p. 24 above. 
2. Daily here stands for the shortest interval after which the firm is free to revise its decision as to 
how much employment to offer. It is, so to speak, the minimum effective unit of economic time. 
3.  It  is  not  necessary  that  the  level  of  long-period  employment  should  be  constant,  i.e.  long-period 
conditions are not necessarily static. For example, a steady increase in wealth or population may 
constitute  a  part  of  the  unchanging  expectation.  The  only  condition  is  that  the  existing 
expectations should have been foreseen sufficiently far ahead. 
4. This emphasis on the expectation entertained when the decision to produce is taken, meets, I think, 
Mr.  Hawtrey’s  point  that  input  and  accumulation  of  stocks  before  prices  have  fallen  or 
disappointment in respect of output is reflected in a realised loss relatively to expectation. For the 
accumulation of unsold stocks (or decline of forward orders) is precisely the kind of event which is 
most  likely  to  cause  input  to  differ  from  what  mere  statistics  of  the  sale-proceeds  of  previous 
output would indicate if they were to be projected without criticism into the next period. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
Chapter 6 
THE DEFINITION OF INCOME, SAVING AND INVESTMENT 
I. Income 
During any period of time an entrepreneur will have sold finished output to consumers or 
to other entrepreneurs for a certain sum which we will designate as A. He will also have 
spent  a  certain  sum,  designated  by  A1,  on  purchasing  finished  output  from  other 
entrepreneurs. And he will end up with a capital equipment, which term includes both his 
stocks of unfinished goods or working capital and his stocks of finished goods, having a 
value G. 
Some part, however, of A + G − A1 will be attributable, not to the activities of the period 
in question, but to the capital equipment which he had at the beginning of the period. We 
must, therefore, in order to arrive at what we mean by the income of the current period, 
deduct from A + G − A1 a certain sum, to represent that part of its value which has been 
(in  some  sense)  contributed  by  the  equipment  inherited  from  the  previous  period.  The 
problem of defining income is solved as soon as we have found a satisfactory method for 
calculating this deduction. 
There  are  two  possible  principles  for  calculating  it,  each  of  which  has  a  certain 
significance;—one  of  them  in  connection  with  production,  and  the  other  in  connection 
with consumption. Let us consider them in turn. 
(i) The actual value G of the capital equipment at the end of the period is the net result of 
the entrepreneur, on the one hand, having maintained and improved it during the period, 
both by purchases from other entrepreneurs and by work done upon it by himself, and, on 
the other hand, having exhausted or depreciated it through using it to produce output. If 
he had decided not to use it to produce output, there is, nevertheless, a certain optimum 
sum  which  it  would  have  paid  him  to  spend  on  maintaining  and  improving  it.  Let  us 
suppose that, in this event, he would have spent B' on its maintenance and improvement, 
and that, having had this spent on it, it would have been worth G' at the end of the period. 
That is to say, G' − B' is the maximum net value which might have been conserved from 
the  previous  period,  if  it  had  not  been  used  to  produce  A.  The  excess  of  this  potential 
value of the equipment over G − A1 is the measure of what has been sacrificed (one way 
or another) to produce A. Let us call this quantity, namely 
(G' − B') − (G −  A1), 
which measures the sacrifice of value involved in the production of A, the user cost of A. 
User  cost  will  be  written  U[1].  The  amount  paid  out  by  the  entrepreneur  to  the  other 
factors of production in return for their services, which from their point of view is their 

income, we will call the factor cost of A. The sum of the factor cost F and the user cost U 
we shall call the prime cost of the output A. 
We can then define the income[2] of the entrepreneur as being the excess of the value of 
his finished output sold during the period over his prime cost. The entrepreneur's income, 
that is to say, is taken as being equal to the quantity, depending on his scale of production, 
which  he  endeavours  to  maximise,  i.e.  to  his  gross  profit  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  this 
term;—which  agrees  with  common  sense.  Hence,  since  the  income  of  the  rest  of  the 
community is equal to the entrepreneur's factor cost, aggregate income is equal to A − U. 
Income,  thus  defined,  is  a  completely  unambiguous  quantity.  Moreover,  since  it  is  the 
entrepreneur's  expectation  of  the  excess  of  this  quantity  over  his  outgoings  to  the  other 
factors  of  production  which  he  endeavours  to  maximise  when  he  decides  how  much 
employment to give to the other factors of production, it is the quantity which is causally 
significant for employment. 
It  is  conceivable,  of  course,  that  G − A1  may  exceed  G' − B',  so  that  user  cost  will  be 
negative.  For  example,  this  may  well  be  the case  if  we  happen  to  choose  our  period  in 
such a way that input has been increasing during the period but without there having been 
time for the increased output to reach the stage of being finished and sold. It will also be 
the  case,  whenever  there  is  positive  investment,  if  we  imagine  industry  to  be  so  much 
integrated  that  entrepreneurs  make  most  of  their  equipment  for  themselves.  Since, 
however, user cost is only negative when the entrepreneur has been increasing his capital 
equipment by his own labour, we can, in an economy where capital equipment is largely 
manufactured by different firms from those which use it, normally think of user cost as 
being  positive.  Moreover,  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  of  a  case  where  marginal  user  cost 
associated with an increase in A, i.e. dU/dA, will be other than positive. 
It may be convenient to mention here, in anticipation of the latter part of this chapter, that, 
for  the  community  as  a  whole,  the  aggregate  consumption  (C)  of  the  period  is  equal  to 
Σ(A − A1),  and  the  aggregate  investment  (I)  is  equal  to  Σ(A1 − U).  Moreover,  U  is  the 
individual  entrepreneur's  disinvestment  (and  − U  his  investment)  in  respect  of  his  own 
equipment  exclusive  of  what  he  buys  from  other  entrepreneurs.  Thus  in  a  completely 
integrated system (where A1  =  0) consumption is equal to A and investment to − U, i.e. 
to G − (G' − B'). The slight complication of the above, through the introduction of A1, is 
simply  due  to  the  desirability  of  providing  in  a  generalised  way  for  the  case  of  a  non-
integrated system of production. 
Furthermore,  the  effective  demand  is  simply  the  aggregate  income  (or  proceeds)  which 
the entrepreneurs expect to receive, inclusive of the incomes which they will hand on to 
the  other  factors  of  production,  from  the  amount  of  current  employment  which  they 
decide to give. The aggregate demand function relates various hypothetical quantities of 
employment to the proceeds which their outputs are expected to yield; and the effective 
demand is the point on the aggregate demand function which becomes effective because, 
taken  in  conjunction  with  the  conditions  of  supply,  it  corresponds  to  the  level  of 
employment which maximises the entrepreneur's expectation of profit. 

This set of definitions also has the advantage that we can equate the marginal proceeds 
(or income) to the marginal factor cost; and thus arrive at the same sort of propositions 
relating  marginal proceeds  thus defined to marginal factor  costs  as  have been stated  by 
those  economists  who,  by  ignoring  user  cost  or  assuming  it  to  be  zero,  have  equated 
supply price[3] to marginal factor cost[4]. 
(ii) We turn, next, to the second of the principles referred to above. We have dealt so far 
with that part of the change in the value of the capital equipment at the end of the period 
as compared with its value at the beginning which is due to the voluntary decisions of the 
entrepreneur  in  seeking  to  maximise  his  profit.  But  there  may,  in  addition,  be  an 
involuntary  loss  (or  gain)  in  the  value  of  his  capital  equipment,  occurring  for  reasons 
beyond his control and irrespective of his current decisions, on account of (e.g.) a change 
in market values, wastage by obsolescence or the mere passage of time, or destruction by 
catastrophe such as war or earthquake. Now some part of these involuntary losses, whilst 
they are unavoidable, are—broadly speaking—not unexpected; such as losses through the 
lapse  of  time  irrespective  of  use,  and  also  'normal'  obsolescence  which,  as  Professor 
Pigou  expresses  it,  'is  sufficiently  regular  to  be  foreseen,  if  not  in  detail,  at  least  in  the 
large',  including,  we  may  add,  those  losses  to  the  community  as  a  whole  which  are 
sufficiently  regular  to  be  commonly  regarded  as  'insurable  risks'.  Let  us  ignore  for  the 
moment the fact that the amount of the expected loss depends on when the expectation is 
assumed  to  be  framed,  and  let  us  call  the  depreciation  of  the  equipment,  which  is 
involuntary but not unexpected, i.e. the excess of the expected depreciation over the user 
cost, the supplementary cost, which will be written V. It is, perhaps, hardly necessary to 
point  out  that  this  definition  is  not  the  same  as  Marshall's  definition  of  supplementary 
cost,  though  the  underlying  idea,  namely,  of  dealing  with  that  part  of  the  expected 
depreciation which does not enter into prime cost, is similar. 
In reckoning, therefore, the net income and the net profit of the entrepreneur it is usual to 
deduct the estimated amount of the supplementary cost from his income and gross profit 
as  defined  above.  For  the  psychological  effect  on  the  entrepreneur,  when  he  is 
considering what he is free to spend and to save, of the supplementary cost is virtually the 
same  as  though  it  came  off  his  gross  profit.  In  his  capacity  as  a  producer  deciding 
whether or not to use the equipment, prime cost and gross profit, as defined above, are 
the  significant  concepts.  But  in  his  capacity  as  a  consumer  the  amount  of  the 
supplementary cost works on his mind in the same way as if it were a part of the prime 
cost.  Hence  we  shall  not  only  come  nearest  to  common  usage  but  will  also  arrive  at  a 
concept  which  is  relevant  to  the  amount  of  consumption,  if,  in  defining  aggregate  net 
income, we deduct the supplementary cost as well as the user cost, so that aggregate net 
income is equal to A − U − V. 
There  remains  the  change  in  the  value  of  the  equipment,  due  to  unforeseen  changes  in 
market  values,  exceptional  obsolescence  or  destruction  by  catastrophe,  which  is  both 
involuntary and—in a broad sense—unforeseen.  The  actual  loss under this head, which 
we disregard even in reckoning net income and charge to capital account, may be called 
the windfall loss. 

The  causal  significance  of  net  income  lies  in  the  psychological  influence  of  the 
magnitude  of  V  on  the  amount  of  current  consumption,  since  net  income  is  what  we 
suppose the ordinary man to reckon his available income to be when he is deciding how 
much to spend on current consumption. This is not, of course, the only factor of which he 
takes account when he is deciding how much to spend. It makes a considerable difference, 
for example, how much windfall gain or loss he is making on capital account. But there is 
a  difference  between  the  supplementary  cost  and  a  windfall  loss  in  that  changes  in  the 
former are apt to affect him in just the same way as changes in his gross profit. It is the 
excess  of  the  proceeds  of  the  current  output  over  the  sum  of  the  prime  cost  and  the 
supplementary  cost  which  is  relevant  to  the  entrepreneur's  consumption;  whereas, 
although the windfall loss (or gain) enters into his decisions, it does not enter into them 
on  the  same  scale—a  given  windfall  loss  does  not  have  the  same  effect  as  an  equal 
supplementary cost. 
We must now recur, however, to the point that the line between supplementary costs and 
windfall losses, i.e. between those unavoidable losses which we think it proper to debit to 
income account and those which it is reasonable to reckon as a windfall loss (or gain) on 
capital account, is partly a conventional or psychological one, depending on what are the 
commonly  accepted  criteria  for  estimating  the  former.  For  no  unique  principle  can  be 
established for the estimation of supplementary cost, and its amount will depend on our 
choice of an accounting method. The expected value of the supplementary cost, when the 
equipment  was  originally  produced,  is  a  definite  quantity.  But  if  it  is  re-estimated 
subsequently,  its  amount  over  the  remainder  of  the  life  of  the  equipment  may  have 
changed as a result of a change in the meantime in our expectations; the windfall capital 
loss  being  the  discounted  value  of  the  difference  between  the  former  and  the  revised 
expectation  of  the  prospective  series  of  U  +  V.  It  is  a  widely  approved  principle  of 
business accounting, endorsed by the Inland Revenue authorities, to establish a figure for 
the sum of the supplementary cost and the user cost when the equipment is acquired and 
to  maintain  this  unaltered  during  the  life  of  the  equipment,  irrespective  of  subsequent 
changes in expectation. In this case the supplementary cost over any period must be taken 
as  the  excess  of  this  predetermined  figure  over  the  actual  user  cost.  This  has  the 
advantage  of  ensuring  that  the  windfall  gain  or  loss  shall  be  zero  over  the  life  of  the 
equipment  taken  as  a  whole.  But  it  is  also  reasonable  in  certain  circumstances  to 
recalculate  the  allowance  for  supplementary  cost  on  the  basis  of  current  values  and 
expectations at an arbitrary accounting interval, e.g. annually. Business men in fact differ 
as  to  which  course  they  adopt.  It  may  be  convenient  to  call  the  initial  expectation  of 
supplementary  cost  when  the  equipment  is  first  acquired  the  basic  supplementary  cost, 
and  the  same  quantity  recalculated  up  to  date  on  the  basis  of  current  values  and 
expectations the current supplementary cost. 
Thus we cannot get closer to a quantitative definition of supplementary cost than that it 
comprises those deductions from his income which a typical entrepreneur makes before 
reckoning what he considers his net income for the purpose of declaring a dividend (in 
the case of a corporation) or of deciding the scale of his current consumption (in the case 
of an individual). Since windfall charges on capital account are not going to be ruled out 
of the picture, it is clearly better, in case of doubt, to assign an item to capital account, 

and to include in supplementary cost only what rather obviously belongs there. For any 
overloading of the former can be corrected by allowing it more influence on the rate of 
current consumption than it would otherwise have had. 
It will be seen that our definition of net income comes very close to Marshall's definition 
of  income,  when  he  decided  to  take  refuge  in  the  practices  of  the  Income  Tax 
Commissioners  and—broadly  speaking  to  regard  as  income  whatever  they,  with  their 
experience, choose to treat as such. For the fabric of their decisions can be regarded as 
the result of the most careful and extensive investigation which is available, to interpret 
what, in practice, it is usual to treat as net income. It also corresponds to the money value 
of Professor Pigou's most recent definition of the national dividend[5]. 
It  remains  true,  however,  that  net  income,  being  based  on  an  equivocal  criterion  which 
different authorities might interpret differently, is not perfectly clear-cut. Professor Hayek, 
for  example,  has  suggested  that  an  individual  owner  of  capital  goods  might  aim  at 
keeping the income he derives  from his possessions constant,  so that he would not feel 
himself free to spend his income on consumption until he had set aside sufficient to offset 
any tendency of his investment-income to decline for whatever reason[6]. I doubt if such 
an  individual  exists;  but,  obviously,  no  theoretical  objection  can  be  raised  against  this 
deduction  as  providing  a  possible  psychological  criterion  of  net  income.  But  when 
Professor  Hayek  infers  that  the  concepts  of  saving  and  investment  suffer  from  a 
corresponding vagueness, he is only right if he means net saving and net investment. The 
saving and the investment, which are relevant to the theory of employment, are clear of 
this defect, and are capable of objective definition, as we have shown above. 
Thus  it  is  a  mistake  to  put  all  the  emphasis  on  net  income,  which  is  only  relevant  to 
decisions concerning consumption, and is, moreover, only separated  from various other 
factors affecting consumption by a narrow line; and to overlook (as has been usual) the 
concept of income proper, which is the concept relevant to decisions concerning current 
production and is quite unambiguous. 
The above definitions of income and of net income are intended to conform as closely as 
possible  to  common  usage.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that  I  should  at  once  remind  the 
reader that in my Treatise on Money I defined income in a special sense. The peculiarity 
in  my  former  definition  related  to  that  part  of  aggregate  income  which  accrues  to  the 
entrepreneurs, since I took neither the profit (whether gross or net) actually realised from 
their  current  operations  nor  the  profit  which  they  expected  when  they  decided  to 
undertake  their  current  operations,  but  in  some  sense  (not,  as  I  now  think,  sufficiently 
defined  if  we  allow  for  the  possibility  of  changes  in  the  scale  of  output)  a  normal  or 
equilibrium profit; with the result that on this definition saving exceeded investment by 
the amount of the excess of normal profit over the actual profit. I am afraid that this use 
of terms has caused considerable confusion, especially in the case of the correlative use 
of  saving;  since  conclusions  (relating,  in  particular,  to  the  excess  of  saving  over 
investment), which were only valid if the terms employed were interpreted in my special 
sense, have been frequently adopted in popular discussion as though the terms were being 
employed  in  their  more  familiar  sense.  For  this  reason,  and  also  because  I  no  longer 

require  my  former  terms  to  express  my  ideas  accurately,  I  have  decided  to  discard 
them—with much regret for the confusion which they have caused. 
II. Saving and Investment 
Amidst the welter of divergent usages of terms, it is agreeable to discover one fixed point. 
So  far  as  I  know,  everyone  is  agreed  that  saving  means  the  excess  of  income  over 
expenditure  on  consumption.  Thus  any  doubts  about  the  meaning  of  saving  must  arise 
from  doubts  about  the  meaning  either  of  income  or  of  consumption.  Income  we  have 
defined  above.  Expenditure  on  consumption  during  any  period  must  mean  the  value  of 
goods sold to consumers during that period, which throws us back to the question of what 
is  meant  by  a  consumer-purchaser.  Any  reasonable  definition  of  the  line  between 
consumer-purchasers and investor-purchasers will serve us equally well, provided that it 
is  consistently  applied.  Such  problem  as  there  is,  e.g.  whether  it  is  right  to  regard  the 
purchase  of  a  motor-car  as  a  consumer-purchase  and  the  purchase  of  a  house  as  an 
investor-purchase, has been frequently discussed and I have nothing material to add to the 
discussion. 
The  criterion  must  obviously  correspond  to  where  we  draw  the  line  between  the 
consumer and the entrepreneur. Thus when we have defined A1 as the value of what one 
entrepreneur  has  purchased  from  another,  we  have  implicitly  settled  the  question.  It 
follows  that  expenditure  on  consumption  can  be  unambiguously  defined  as  Σ(A − A1), 
where A is the total sales made during the period and A1 is the total sales made by one 
entrepreneur to another. In what follows it will be convenient, as a rule, to omit and write 
A for the aggregate sales of all kinds, A1 for the aggregate sales from one entrepreneur to 
another and U for the aggregate user costs of the entrepreneurs. 
Having now defined both income and consumption, the definition of saving, which is the 
excess  of  income  over  consumption,  naturally  follows.  Since  income  is  equal  to  A − U 
and consumption is equal to A − A1, it follows that saving is equal to A1 − U. Similarly, 
we have net saving for the excess of net income over consumption, equal to A1 − U  − V. 
Our definition of income also leads at once to the definition of current investment. For we 
must mean by this the current addition to the value of the capital equipment which has 
resulted from the productive activity of the period. This is, clearly, equal to what we have 
just defined as saving. For it is that part of the income of the period which has not passed 
into consumption. We have seen above that as the result of the production of any period 
entrepreneurs end up with having sold finished output having a value A and with a capital 
equipment  which  has  suffered  a  deterioration  measured  by  U  (or  an  improvement 
measured by − U where U is negative) as a result of having produced and parted with A, 
after allowing for purchases A1 from other entrepreneurs. During the same period finished 
output  having  a  value  A − A1  will  have  passed  into  consumption.  The  excess  of  A − U 
over  A − A1,  namely  A1 − U,  is  the  addition  to  capital  equipment  as  a  result  of  the 
productive  activities  of  the  period  and  is,  therefore,  the  investment  of  the  period. 
Similarly A1 − U  − V; which is the net addition to capital equipment, after allowing for 
normal  impairment  in  the  value  of  capital  apart  from  its  being  used  and  apart  from 

windfall changes in the value of the equipment chargeable to capital account, is the net 
investment of the period. 
Whilst,  therefore,  the  amount  of  saving  is  an  outcome  of  the  collective  behaviour  of 
individual  consumers  and  the  amount  of  investment  of  the  collective  behaviour  of 
individual entrepreneurs, these two amounts are necessarily equal, since each of them is 
equal  to  the  excess  of  income  over  consumption.  Moreover,  this  conclusion  in  no  way 
depends  on  any  subtleties  or  peculiarities  in  the  definition  of  income  given  above. 
Provided  it  is  agreed  that  income  is  equal  to  the  value  of  current  output,  that  current 
investment is equal to the value of that part of current output which is not consumed, and 
that  saving  is  equal  to  the  excess  of  income  over  consumption—all  of  which  is 
conformable both to common sense and to the traditional usage of the great majority of 
economists—the equality of saving and investment necessarily follows. In short, 
Income  =  value of output  =  consumption + investment. 
Saving  =  income − consumption. 
Therefore saving  =  investment. 
Thus  any  set  of  definitions  which  satisfy  the  above  conditions  leads  to  the  same 
conclusion. It is only by denying the validity of one or other of them that the conclusion 
can be avoided. 
The equivalence between the quantity of saving and the quantity of investment emerges 
from the bilateral character of the transactions between the producer on the one hand and, 
on the other hand, the consumer or the purchaser of capital equipment. 
Income is created by the value in excess of user cost which the producer obtains for the 
output he has sold; but the whole of this output must obviously have been sold either to a 
consumer or to another entrepreneur; and each entrepreneur's current investment is equal 
to the excess of the equipment which he has purchased from other entrepreneurs over his 
own user cost. Hence, in the aggregate the excess of income over consumption, which we 
call saving, cannot differ from the addition to capital equipment which we call investment. 
And similarly with net saving and net investment. Saving, in fact, is a mere residual. The 
decisions  to  consume  and  the  decisions  to  invest  between  them  determine  incomes. 
Assuming  that  the  decisions  to  invest  become  effective,  they  must  in  doing  so  either 
curtail  consumption  or  expand  income.  Thus  the  act  of  investment  in  itself  cannot  help 
causing  the  residual  or  margin,  which  we  call  saving,  to  increase  by  a  corresponding 
amount. 
It might be, of course, that individuals were so tête montée in their decisions as to how 
much they themselves would save and invest respectively, that there would be no point of 
price  equilibrium  at  which  transactions  could  take  place.  In  this  case  our  terms  would 
cease to be applicable, since output would no longer have a definite market value, prices 
would find no resting-place between zero and infinity. Experience shows, however, that 

this, in fact, is not so; and that there are habits of psychological response which allow of 
an  equilibrium  being  reached  at  which  the  readiness  to  buy  is  equal  to  the  readiness  to 
sell. That there should be such a thing as a market value for output is, at the same time, a 
necessary  condition  for  money-income  to  possess  a  definite  value  and  a  sufficient 
condition for the aggregate amount which saving individuals decide to save to be equal to 
the aggregate amount which investing individuals decide to invest. 
Clearness  of  mind  on  this  matter  is  best  reached,  perhaps,  by  thinking  in  terms  of 
decisions to consume (or to refrain from consuming) rather than of decisions to save. A 
decision to consume or not to consume truly lies within the power of the individual; so 
does  a  decision  to  invest  or  not  to  invest.  The  amounts  of  aggregate  income  and  of 
aggregate  saving  are  the  results  of  the  free  choices  of  individuals  whether  or  not  to 
consume and whether or not to invest; but they are neither of them capable of assuming 
an independent value resulting from a separate set of decisions taken irrespective of the 
decisions concerning consumption and investment. In accordance with this principle, the 
conception  of  the  propensity  to  consume  will,  in  what  follows,  take  the  place  of  the 
propensity or disposition to save. 
1. Some further observations on user cost are given in an appendix to this chapter. 
2. As distinguished from his net income which we shall define below. 
3. Supply price is, I think, an incompletely defined term, if the problem of defining user cost has been 
ignored.  The matter  is  further  discussed  in  the  appendix  to  this  chapter,  where I  argue  that  the 
exclusion  of  user  cost  from  supply  price,  whilst  sometimes  appropriate  in  the  case  of  aggregate 
supply  price,  is  inappropriate  to  the  problems  of  the  supply  price  of  a  unit  of  output  for  an 
individual firm. 
4. For example, let us take Zw = f(N), or alternatively Z = W. f(N) as the aggregate supply function 
(where  W  is  the  wage-unit and W.Zw  =  Z).  Then,  since  the  proceeds  of the  marginal  product  is 
equal to the marginal factor-cost at every point on the aggregate supply curve, we have  
∆N = ∆Aw - ∆Uw = ∆Zw = ∆Φ(N),  
that is to say f'(N) = 1; provided that factor cost bears a constant ratio to wage-cost, and that the 
aggregate  supply  function  for  each  firm  (the  number  of  which  is  assumed  to  be  constant)  is 
independent  of  the  number  of  men  employed  in  other  industries,  so  that  the  terms  of  the  above 
equation, which hold good for each individual entrepreneur, can be summed for the entrepreneurs 
as a whole. This means that, if wages are constant and other factor costs are a constant proportion 
of the wages-bill, the aggregate supply function is linear with a slope given by the reciprocal of the 
money-wage. 
5. Economic Journal, June 1935, p. 235. 
6. “The Maintenance of Capital”, Economica, August 1935, p. 241 et seq. 
  
 

 
 
APPENDIX ON USER COST 
I 
User  cost  has,  I  think,  an  importance  for  the  classical  theory  of  value  which  has  been 
overlooked. There is more to be said about it than would be relevant or appropriate in this 
place. But, as a digression, we will examine it somewhat further in this appendix. 
An entrepreneur's user cost is by definition equal to 
A1 + (G' −  B') − G, 
where A1 is the amount of our entrepreneur's purchases from other entrepreneurs, G the 
actual value of his capital equipment at the end of the period, and G' the value it might 
have  had  at  the  end  of  the  period  if  he  had  refrained  from  using  it  and  had  spent  the 
optimum  sum  B'  on  its  maintenance  and  improvement.  Now  G − (G' − B'),  namely  the 
increment in the value of the entrepreneur's equipment beyond the net value which he has 
inherited from the previous period, represents the entrepreneur's current investment in his 
equipment and can be written I. Thus U, the user cost of his sales-turnover A, is equal to 
A1 − I  where  A1  is  what  he  has  bought  from  other  entrepreneurs  and  I  is  what  he  has 
currently invested in his own equipment. A little reflection will show that all this is no 
more than common sense. Some part of his outgoings to other entrepreneurs is balanced 
by the value of his current investment in his own equipment, and the rest represents the 
sacrifice which the output he has sold must have cost him over and above the total sum 
which  he  has  paid  out  to  the  factors  of  production.  If  the  reader  tries  to  express  the 
substance  of  this  otherwise,  he  will  find  that  its  advantage  lies  in  its  avoidance  of 
insoluble  (and  unnecessary)  accounting  problems.  There  is,  I  think,  no  other  way  of 
analysing  the  current  proceeds  of  production  unambiguously.  If  industry  is  completely 
integrated or if the entrepreneur has bought nothing from outside, so that A1  =  0, the user 
cost  is  simply  the  equivalent  of  the  current  disinvestment  involved  in  using  the 
equipment; but we are still left with the advantage that we do not require at any stage of 
the  analysis  to  allocate  the  factor  cost  between  the  goods  which  are  sold  and  the 
equipment  which  is  retained.  Thus  we  can  regard  the  employment  given  by  a  firm, 
whether  integrated  or  individual,  as  depending  on  a  single  consolidated  decision—a 
procedure  which  corresponds  to  the  actual  interlocking  character  of  the  production  of 
what is currently sold with total production. 
The  concept  of  user  cost  enables  us,  moreover,  to  give  a  clearer  definition  than  that 
usually adopted of the short-period supply price of a unit of a firm's saleable output. For 
the short-period supply price is the sum of the marginal factor cost and the marginal user 
cost. 

Now in the modern theory of value it has been a usual practice to equate the short-period 
supply  price  to  the  marginal  factor  cost  alone.  It  is  obvious,  however,  that  this  is  only 
legitimate if marginal user cost is zero or if supply price is specially defined so as to be 
net of marginal user cost, just as I have defined (p. 24 above) 'proceeds' and 'aggregate 
supply  price'  as  being  net  of  aggregate  user  cost.  But,  whereas  it  may  be  occasionally 
convenient in dealing with output as a whole to deduct user cost, this procedure deprives 
our analysis of all reality if it is habitually (and tacitly) applied to the output of a single 
industry or firm, since it divorces the 'supply price' of an article from any ordinary sense 
of  its  'price';  and  some  confusion  may  have  resulted  from  the  practice  of  doing  so.  It 
seems to have been assumed that 'supply price' has an obvious meaning as applied to a 
unit of the saleable output of an individual firm, and the matter has not been deemed to 
require discussion. Yet the treatment both of what is purchased from other firms and of 
the  wastage  of  the  firm's  own  equipment  as  a  consequence  of  producing  the  marginal 
output involves the whole pack of perplexities which attend the definition of income. For, 
even  if  we  assume  that  the  marginal  cost  of  purchases  from  other  firms  involved  in 
selling an additional unit of output has to be deducted from the sale-proceeds per unit in 
order to give us what we mean by our firm's supply price, we still have to allow for the 
marginal disinvestment in the firm's own equipment involved in producing the marginal 
output.  Even  if  all  production  is  carried  on  by  a  completely  integrated  firm,  it  is  still 
illegitimate  to  suppose  that  the  marginal  user  cost  is  zero,  i.e.  that  the  marginal 
disinvestment in equipment due to the production of the marginal output can generally be 
neglected. 
The concepts of user cost and of supplementary cost also enable us to establish a clearer 
relationship between long-period supply price and short-period supply price. Long-period 
cost must obviously include an amount to cover the basic supplementary cost as well as 
the expected prime cost appropriately averaged over the life of the equipment. That is to 
say, the long-period cost of the output is equal to the expected sum of the prime cost and 
the  supplementary  cost;  and,  furthermore,  in  order  to  yield  a  normal  profit,  the  long-
period  supply  price  must  exceed  the  long-period  cost  thus  calculated  by  an  amount 
determined by the current rate of interest on loans of comparable term and risk, reckoned 
as a percentage of the cost of the equipment. Or if we prefer to take a standard 'pure' rate 
of interest, we must include in the long-period cost a third term which we might call the 
risk-cost  to  cover  the  unknown  possibilities  of  the  actual  yield  differing  from  the 
expected yield. Thus the long-period supply price is equal to the sum of the prime cost, 
the supplementary cost, the risk cost and the interest cost, into which several components 
it  can  be  analysed.  The  short-period  supply  price,  on  the  other  hand,  is  equal  to  the 
marginal  prime  cost.  The  entrepreneur  must,  therefore,  expect,  when  he  buys  or 
constructs  his equipment, to  cover his supplementary cost, his risk cost and his interest 
cost out of the excess of the marginal value of the prime cost over its average value; so 
that  in  long-period  equilibrium  the  excess  of  the  marginal  prime  cost  over  the  average 
prime cost is equal to the sum of the supplementary, risk and interest costs[1]. 
The  level  of  output,  at  which  marginal  prime  cost  is  exactly  equal  to  the  sum  of  the 
average prime and supplementary costs, has a special importance, because it is the point 
at which the entrepreneur's trading account breaks even. It corresponds, that is to say, to 

the point of zero net profit; whilst with a smaller output than this he is trading at a net 
loss. 
The extent to which the supplementary cost has to be provided for apart from the prime 
cost varies very much from one type of equipment to another. Two extreme cases are the 
following: 
(i) Some part of the maintenance of the equipment must necessarily take place pari passu 
with the act of using it (e.g. oiling the machine). The expense of this (apart from outside 
purchases) is included in the factor cost. If, for physical reasons, the exact amount of the 
whole  of  the  current  depreciation  has  necessarily  to  be  made  good  in  this  way,  the 
amount  of  the  user  cost  (apart  from  outside  purchases)  would  be  equal  and  opposite  to 
that  of  the  supplementary  cost;  and  in  long-period  equilibrium  the  marginal  factor  cost 
would exceed the average factor cost by an amount equal to the risk and interest cost. 
(ii) Some part of the deterioration in the value of the equipment only occurs if it is used. 
The cost of this is charged in user cost, in so far as it is not made good pari passu with 
the  act  of  using  it.  If  loss  in  the  value  of  the  equipment  could  only  occur  in  this  way, 
supplementary cost would be zero. 
It  may  be  worth  pointing  out  that  an  entrepreneur  does  not  use  his  oldest  and  worst 
equipment  first,  merely  because  its  user  cost  is  low;  since  its  low  user  cost  may  be 
outweighed by its relative inefficiency, i.e. by its high factor cost. Thus an entrepreneur 
uses by preference that part of his equipment for which the user cost plus factor cost is 
least per unit of output[2]. It follows that for any given volume of output of the product in 
question there is a corresponding user cost[3], but that this total user cost does not bear a 
uniform  relation  to  the  marginal  user  cost,  i.e.  to  the  increment  of  user  cost  due  to  an 
increment in the rate of output. 
II 
User cost constitutes one of the links between the present and the future. For in deciding 
his  scale  of  production  an  entrepreneur  has  to  exercise  a  choice  between  using  up  his 
equipment now and preserving it to be used later on. It is the expected sacrifice of future 
benefit involved in present use which determines the amount of the user cost, and it is the 
marginal  amount  of  this  sacrifice  which,  together  with  the  marginal  factor  cost  and  the 
expectation of the marginal proceeds,  determines  his  scale  of  production.  How,  then,  is 
the user cost of an act of production calculated by the entrepreneur? 
We have defined the user cost as the reduction in the value of the equipment due to using 
it  as  compared  with  not  using  it,  after  allowing  for  the  cost  of  the  maintenance  and 
improvements which it would be worth while to undertake and for purchases from other 
entrepreneurs. It must be arrived at, therefore, by calculating the discounted value of the 
additional  prospective  yield  which  would  be  obtained  at  some  later  date  if  it  were  not 
used  now.  Now  this  must  be  at  least  equal  to  the  present  value  of  the  opportunity  to 

postpone  replacement  which  will  result  from  laying  up  the  equipment;  and  it  may  be 
more[4]. 
If  there  is  no  surplus  or  redundant  stock,  so  that  more  units  of  similar  equipment  are 
being newly produced every year either as an addition or in replacement, it is evident that 
marginal  user  cost  will  be  calculable  by  reference  to  the  amount  by  which  the  life  or 
efficiency  of  the  equipment  will  be  shortened  if  it  is  used,  and  the  current  replacement 
cost. If, however, there is redundant equipment, then the user cost will also depend on the 
rate of interest and the current (i.e. re-estimated) supplementary cost over the period of 
time before the redundancy is expected to be absorbed through wastage, etc. In this way 
interest  cost  and  current  supplementary  cost  enter  indirectly  into  the calculation of user 
cost. 
The calculation is exhibited in its simplest and most intelligible form when the factor cost 
is zero, e.g. in the case of a redundant stock of a raw material such as copper, on the lines 
which  I  have  worked  out  in  my  Treatise  on  Money,  vol.  ii.  chap.  29.  Let  us  take  the 
prospective values of copper at various future dates, a series which will be governed by 
the rate at which redundancy is being absorbed and gradually approaches the estimated 
normal cost. The present value or user cost of a ton of surplus copper will then be equal 
to the greatest of the values obtainable by subtracting from the estimated future value at 
any given date of a ton of copper the interest cost and the current supplementary cost on a 
ton of copper between that date and the present. 
In the same way the user cost of a ship or factory or machine, when these equipments are 
in redundant supply, is its estimated replacement cost discounted at the percentage rate of 
its interest  and  current  supplementary  costs to  the  prospective  date  of  absorption  of  the 
redundancy. 
We have assumed above that the equipment will be replaced in due course by an identical 
article. If the equipment in question will not be renewed identically when it is worn out, 
then its user cost has to be calculated by taking a proportion of the user cost of the new 
equipment,  which  will  be  erected  to  do  its  work  when  it  is  discarded,  given  by  its 
comparative efficiency. 
III 
The  reader  should  notice  that,  where  the  equipment  is  not  obsolescent  but  merely 
redundant for the time being, the difference between the actual user cost and its normal 
value  (i.e.  the  value  when  there  is  no  redundant  equipment)  varies  with  the  interval  of 
time which is expected to elapse before the redundancy is absorbed. Thus if the type of 
equipment in question is of all ages and not 'bunched', so that a fair proportion is reaching 
the  end  of  its  life  annually,  the  marginal  user  cost  will  not  decline  greatly  unless  the 
redundancy is exceptionally excessive. In the case of a general slump, marginal user cost 
will  depend  on  how  long  entrepreneurs  expect  the  slump  to  last.  Thus  the  rise  in  the 
supply  price  when  affairs  begin  to  mend  may  be  partly  due  to  a  sharp  increase  in 
marginal user cost due to a revision of their expectations. 

It  has  sometimes  been  argued,  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  business  men,  that  organised 
schemes  for  scrapping  redundant  plant  cannot  have  the  desired  effect  of  raising  prices 
unless they apply to the whole of the redundant plant. But the concept of user cost shows 
how the scrapping of (say) half the redundant plant may have the effect of raising prices 
immediately.  For  by  bringing  the  date  of  the  absorption  of  the  redundancy  nearer,  this 
policy raises marginal user cost and consequently increases the current supply price. Thus 
business men would seem to have the notion of user cost implicitly in mind, though they 
do  not  formulate  it  distinctly.  If  the  supplementary  cost  is  heavy,  it  follows  that  the 
marginal user cost will be low when there is surplus equipment. Moreover, when there is 
surplus equipment, the marginal factor and user costs are unlikely to be much in excess of 
their  average  value.  If  both  these  conditions  are  fulfilled,  the  existence  of  surplus 
equipment is likely to lead to the entrepreneur's working at a net loss, and perhaps at a 
heavy net loss. There will not be a sudden transition from this state of affairs to a normal 
profit, taking place at the moment when the redundancy is absorbed. As the redundancy 
becomes  less,  the  user  cost  will  gradually  increase;  and  the  excess  of  marginal  over 
average factor and user cost may also gradually increase. 
IV 
In  Marshall's  Principles  of  Economics  (6th  ed.  p.360)  a  part  of  user  cost  is  included  in 
prime cost under the heading of 'extra wear-and-tear of plant'. But no guidance is given as 
to  how  this  item  is  to  be  calculated  or  as  to  its  importance.  In  his  Theory  of 
Unemployment (p.42) Professor Pigou expressly assumes that the marginal disinvestment 
in equipment due to the marginal output can, in general, be neglected: 'The differences in 
the  quantity  of  wear-and-tear  suffered  by  equipment  and  in  the  costs  of  non-manual 
labour employed, that are associated with differences in output, are ignored, as being, in 
general,  of  secondary  importance'[5].  Indeed,  the  notion  that  the  disinvestment  in 
equipment  is  zero  at  the  margin  of  production  runs  through  a  good  deal  of  recent 
economic theory. But the whole problem is brought to an obvious head as soon as it is 
thought necessary to explain exactly what is meant by the supply price of an individual 
firm. 
It is true that the cost of maintenance of idle plant may often, for the reasons given above, 
reduce  the  magnitude  of  marginal user cost, especially in a slump which is expected to 
last a long time. Nevertheless a very low user cost at the margin is not a characteristic of 
the  short  period  as  such,  but  of  particular  situations  and  types  of  equipment  where  the 
cost of maintaining idle plant happens to be heavy, and of those disequilibria which are 
characterised by very rapid obsolescence or great redundancy, especially if it is coupled 
with a large proportion of comparatively new plant. 
In the case of raw materials the necessity of allowing for user cost is obvious;—if a ton of 
copper  is  used  up  to-day  it  cannot  be  used  to-morrow,  and  the  value  which  the  copper 
would  have  for  the  purposes  of  to-morrow  must  clearly  he  reckoned  as  a  part  of  the 
marginal  cost.  But  the  fact  has  been  overlooked  that  copper  is  only  an  extreme  case  of 
what occurs whenever capital equipment is used to produce. The assumption that there is 
a sharp division between raw materials where we must allow for the disinvestment due to 

using  them  and  fixed  capital  where  we  can  safely  neglect  it  does  not  correspond  to  the 
facts;—especially  in  normal  conditions  where  equipment  is  falling  due  for  replacement 
every  year  and  the  use  of  equipment  brings  nearer  the  date  at  which  replacement  is 
necessary. 
It  is  an  advantage  of  the  concepts  of  user  cost  and  supplementary  cost  that  they  are  as 
applicable  to  working  and  liquid  capital  as  to  fixed  capital.  The  essential  difference 
between  raw  materials  and  fixed  capital  lies  not  in  their  liability  to  user  and 
supplementary  costs,  but  in  the  fact  that  the  return  to  liquid  capital  consists  of  a  single 
term;  whereas  in  the  case  of  fixed  capital,  which  is  durable  and  used  up  gradually,  the 
return consists of a series of user costs and profits earned in successive periods. 
1. This way of putting it depends on the convenient assumption that the marginal prime cost curve is 
continuous throughout its length for changes in output. In fact, this assumption is often unrealistic, 
and  there  may  be  one  or  more  points  of  discontinuity,  especially  when  we  reach  an  output 
corresponding  to  the  technical  full  capacity  of  the  equipment.  In  this  case  the  marginal  analysis 
partially  breaks  down;  and  the  price  may  exceed  the  marginal  prime  cost,  where  the  latter  is 
reckoned in respect of a small decrease of output. (Similarly there may often be a discontinuity in 
the  downward  direction.  i.e.  for  a  reduction  in  output  below  a  certain  point).  This  is  important 
when  we  are  considering  the  short-period  supply  price  in  long-period  equilibrium,  since  in  that 
case any discontinuities, which may exist corresponding to a point of technical full capacity, must 
be supposed to be in operation. Thus the short-period supply price in long-period equilibrium may 
have to exceed the marginal prime cost (reckoned in terms of a small decrease of output). 
2. Since user cost partly depends on expectations as to the future level of wages, a reduction in the 
wage-unit  which  is  expected  to  be  short-lived  will  cause  factor  cost  and  user  cost  to  move  in 
different proportions and so affect what equipment is used, and, conceivably, the level of effective 
demand, since factor cost may enter into the determination of effective demand in a different way 
from user cost. 
3. The user cost of the equipment which is first brought into use is not only independent of the total 
volume  of  output  (see  below);  i.e.  the  user  cost  may  be  affected  all  along  the  line  when  the  total 
volume of output is changed. 
4. It will be more when it is expected that a more than normal yield can be obtained at some later 
date,  which,  however,  is  not  expected  to  last  long  enough  to  justify  (or  give  time  for)  the 
production of new equipment. To-day’s user cost is equal to the maximum of the discounted values 
of the potential expected yields of all the tomorrows. 
5. Mr. Hawtrey (Economica, May 1934, p. 145) has called attention to Prof. Pigou’s identification of 
supply price with marginal labour cost, and has contended that Prof. Pigou’s argument is thereby 
seriously vitiated. 
  
 
 
 

 
Chapter 7 
THE MEANING OF SAVING AND INVESTMENT FURTHER 
CONSIDERED 
I 
In  the  previous  chapter  saving  and  investment  have  been  so  defined  that  they  are 
necessarily  equal  in  amount,  being,  for  the  community  as  a  whole,  merely  different 
aspects of the same thing. Several contemporary writers (including myself in my Treatise 
on Money) have, however, given special definitions of these terms on which they are not 
necessarily  equal.  Others  have  written  on  the  assumption  that  they  may  be  unequal 
without prefacing their discussion with any definitions at all. It will be useful, therefore, 
with a view to relating the foregoing to other discussions of these terms, to classify some 
of the various uses of them which appear to be current. 
So far as I know, everyone agrees in meaning by saving the excess of income over what 
is spent on consumption. It would certainly be very inconvenient and misleading not to 
mean  this.  Nor  is  there  any  important  difference  of  opinion  as  to  what  is  meant  by 
expenditure  on  consumption.  Thus  the  differences  of  usage  arise  either  out  of  the 
definition of investment or out of that of income. 
II 
Let us take investment first. In popular usage it is common to mean by this the purchase 
of an asset, old or new, by an individual or a corporation. Occasionally, the term might be 
restricted to the purchase of an asset on the Stock Exchange. But we speak just as readily 
of  investing,  for  example,  in  a  house,  or  in  a  machine,  or  in  a  stock  of  finished  or 
unfinished  goods;  and,  broadly  speaking,  new  investment,  as  distinguished  from 
reinvestment,  means  the  purchase  of  a  capital  asset  of  any  kind  out  of  income.  If  we 
reckon  the  sale  of  an  investment  as  being  negative  investment,  i.e.  disinvestment,  my 
own definition is in accordance with popular usage; since exchanges of old investments 
necessarily cancel out. We have, indeed, to adjust for the creation and discharge of debts 
(including changes in the quantity of credit or money); but since for the community as a 
whole the increase or decrease of the aggregate creditor position is always exactly equal 
to the increase or decrease of the aggregate debtor position, this complication also cancels 
out when we are dealing with aggregate investment. Thus, assuming that income in the 
popular sense corresponds to my net income, aggregate investment in the popular sense 
coincides  with  my  definition  of  net  investment,  namely  the  net  addition  to  all  kinds  of 
capital  equipment,  after  allowing  for  those  changes  in  the  value  of  the  old  capital 
equipment which are taken into account in reckoning net income. 
Investment, thus defined, includes, therefore, the increment of capital equipment, whether 
it  consists  of  fixed  capital,  working  capital  or  liquid  capital;  and  the  significant 

differences  of  definition  (apart  from  the  distinction  between  investment  and  net 
investment) are due to the exclusion from investment of one or more of these categories. 
Mr Hawtrey, for example, who attaches great importance to changes in liquid capital, i.e. 
to undesigned increments (or decrements) in the stock of unsold goods, has suggested a 
possible definition of investment from which such changes are excluded. In this case an 
excess of saving over investment would be the same thing as an undesigned increment in 
the  stock  of  unsold  goods,  i.e.  as  an  increase  of  liquid  capital.  Mr  Hawtrey  has  not 
convinced me that this is the factor to stress; for it lays all the emphasis on the correction 
of changes which were in the first instance unforeseen, as compared with those which are, 
rightly or wrongly, anticipated. Mr Hawtrey regards the daily decisions of entrepreneurs 
concerning  their  scale  of  output  as  being  varied  from  the  scale  of  the  previous  day  by 
reference  to  the  changes  in  their  stock  of  unsold  goods.  Certainly,  in  the  case  of 
consumption goods, this plays an important part in their decisions. But I see no object in 
excluding  the  play  of  other  factors  on  their  decisions;  and  I  prefer,  therefore,  to 
emphasise the total change of effective demand and not merely that part of the change in 
effective demand which reflects the increase or decrease of unsold stocks in the previous 
period. Moreover, in the case of fixed capital, the increase or decrease of unused capacity 
corresponds  to  the  increase  or  decrease  in  unsold  stocks  in  its  effect  on  decisions  to 
produce;  and  I  do  not  see  how  Mr  Hawtrey's  method  can  handle  this  at  least  equally 
important factor. 
It seems probable that capital formation and capital consumption, as used by the Austrian 
school  of  economists,  are  not  identical  either  with  investment  and  disinvestment  as 
defined  above  or  with  net  investment  and  disinvestment.  In  particular,  capital 
consumption is said to occur in circumstances where there is quite clearly no net decrease 
in  capital  equipment  as  defined  above.  I  have,  however,  been  unable  to  discover  a 
reference  to  any  passage  where  the  meaning  of  these  terms  is  clearly  explained.  The 
statement, for example, that capital formation occurs when there is a lengthening of the 
period of production does not much advance matters. 
III 
We  come  next  to  the  divergences  between  saving  and  investment  which  are  due  to  a 
special  definition  of  income  and  hence  of  the  excess  of  income  over  consumption.  My 
own use of terms in my Treatise on Money is an example of this. For, as I have explained 
on  p.  60  above,  the  definition  of  income,  which  I  there  employed,  differed  from  my 
present definition by reckoning as the income of entrepreneurs not their actually realised 
profits  but  (in  some  sense)  their  'normal  profit'.  Thus  by  an  excess  of  saving  over 
investment  I  meant  that  the  scale  of  output  was  such  that  entrepreneurs  were  earning  a 
less  than  normal  profit  from  their  ownership  of  the  capital  equipment;  and  by  an 
increased excess of saving over investment I meant that a decline was taking place in the 
actual profits, so that they would be under a motive to contract output. 
As I now think, the volume of employment (and consequently of output and real income) 
is  fixed  by  the  entrepreneur  under  the  motive  of  seeking  to  maximise  his  present  and 

prospective  profits  (the  allowance  for  user  cost  being  determined  by  his  view  as  to  the 
use of equipment which will maximise his return from it over its whole life); whilst the 
volume of employment which will maximise his profit depends on the aggregate demand 
function given by his expectations of the sum of the proceeds resulting from consumption 
and investment respectively on various hypotheses. In my Treatise on Money the concept 
of  changes  in  the  excess  of  investment  over  saving,  as  there  defined,  was  a  way  of 
handling  changes  in  profit,  though  I  did  not  in  that  book  distinguish  clearly  between 
expected  and  realised  results[1].  I  there  argued  that  change  in  the  excess  of  investment 
over saving was the motive force governing changes in the volume of output. Thus the 
new argument, though (as I now think) much more accurate and instructive, is essentially 
a development of the old. Expressed in the language of my Treatise on Money, it would 
run: the expectation of an increased excess of investment over saving, given the former 
volume of employment and output, will induce entrepreneurs to increase the volume of 
employment and output. The significance of both my present and my former arguments 
lies  in  their  attempt  to  show  that  the  volume  of  employment  is  determined  by  the 
estimates  of  effective  demand  made  by  the  entrepreneurs,  an  expected  increase  of 
investment relatively to saving as defined in my Treatise on Money being a criterion of 
an increase in effective demand. But the exposition in my Treatise on Money is, of course, 
very confusing and incomplete in the light of the further developments here set forth. 
Mr  D.  H.  Robertson  has  defined  to-day's  income  as  being  equal  to  yesterday's 
consumption plus investment, so that to-day's saving, in his sense, is equal to yesterday's 
investment  plus  the  excess  of  yesterday's  consumption  over  to-day's  consumption.  On 
this definition saving can exceed investment, namely, by the excess of yesterday's income 
(in my sense) over to-day's income. Thus when Mr Robertson says that there is an excess 
of saving over investment, he means literally the same thing as I mean when I say that 
income is falling, and the excess of saving in his sense is exactly equal to the decline of 
income in my sense. If it were true that current expectations were always determined by 
yesterday's  realised  results,  to-day's  effective  demand  would  be  equal  to  yesterday's 
income.  Thus  Mr  Robertson's  method  might  be  regarded  as  an  alternative.  attempt  to 
mine (being, perhaps, a first approximation to it) to make the same distinction, so vital for 
causal analysis, that I have tried to make by the contrast between effective demand and 
income[2]. 
IV 
We come next to the much vaguer ideas associated with the phrase 'forced saving'. Is any 
clear significance discoverable in these? In my Treatise on Money (vol.1, p. 171, footnote 
[JMK, vol. V, p.154] I gave some references to earlier uses of this phrase and suggested 
that they bore some affinity to the difference between investment and 'saving' in the sense 
in which I there used the latter term. I am no longer confident that there was in fact so 
much  affinity  as  I  then  supposed.  In  any  case,  I  feel  sure  that  'forced  saving'  and 
analogous  phrases  employed  more  recently  (e.g.  by  Professor  Hayek  or  Professor 
Robbins)  have  no  definite  relation  to  the  difference  between  investment  and  'saving'  in 
the sense intended in my Treatise on Money. For whilst these authors have not explained 
exactly  what  they  mean  by  this  term,  it  is  clear  that  'forced  saving',  in  their  sense,  is  a 

